Socio-political, economic and cultural relations play an important role in the movement of people from country to country, regardless of the fact that the country is developing or has a transitional economy.
  In its diversity, migration is linked to similar interrelationships and influences development processes.
Economic imbalances, poverty, lack of peace in the environment, and human rights abuses, as well as fluctuating levels of injustice and the development of democratic institutions, are all factors influencing migration.
  It is estimated that the number of international migrants in the world, including 125 refugees, is one million, half of which are in developing countries.
  In recent years, approximately 1.4 million people have been registered annually in the world's major host countries, about two-thirds of whom come from developing countries.
In general, migration can have a positive impact on ելexit, host countries by providing remittances to the country of exit and providing the host country with the necessary human resources.
  Migration (especially international migration) provides skills exchange and contributes to cultural enrichment.
  Sustainable economic growth, having development strategies that meet this goal, is a necessary means of solving this problem.
  In addition, the potential contribution of emigrants to their economic development can be used more effectively.
In contrast to natural movements, which are an internal source of changes in population structure, migration is an external flow that shows a certain wholeness of people, the result of their relationship with othernesses.
  The result of these interactions is a migration balance (growth or decline).
Migration, which is accompanied by relocation, ie resettlement, includes three stages.  The preparatory stage is the process of developing the territorial mobility of the population.
 The main stage is the process of population resettlement.
։ The final stage is the adaptation of the settlers to the new place.
The concept of "migration mobility" or "mobility" (Latin: mobilis) և the concept of "displacement" ("resettlement") is the same [1].
  There are different understandings of the term "mobility" in the scientific literature, which are interpreted as "no", a general notion of different types of relocation, a synonym for resettlement, a general notion of "potential" real migration, and a potential readiness of the population to change their territorial status.
To some extent, in the presence of the socio-economic crisis in the Republic of Armenia, the social significance of work, Most people see work as a means of meeting material needs.
"After the collapse of the Soviet Union, dozens of industrial enterprises ceased to operate, tens of thousands of workers lost their jobs.
  Unemployment has reached a dangerous level, which has not only economic but also social consequences. "[1]
When a person is unemployed for many years, his mental state is disturbed, which threatens the whole society.
Our research shows that when a man loses his job, he does not realize at first what happened to him, does not believe that he has lost his job.
  It is the first stage of change in a man's mental state, which lasts for a week.
 In the second stage, he accepts unemployment as a temporary phenomenon, which lasts for several weeks.
 The third stage is expressed by a person's anxiety, tormented eating, as the financial means run out, the "man" is looking for a new job for a long time.
  The fourth stage is characterized by the fact that a person adapts to these difficulties.
  The job search is going on without any hope.
  The social and social consequences of the day-to-day,, first of all, gradually worsen the family relations between the spouses և between the spouses և the parents և.
Unemployment multiplies At the same time, the number of potential emigrants living in the country has significantly increased, and pessimistic expectations about the realization of opportunities to receive investments in human capital have been formed, especially among the young and able-bodied sections of the population.
In the analysis of revealing various scientific-economic problems arising in the Republic of Armenia, scientific commentary and identification of solutions to the solution of various economic and methodological problems in the homeland In this case, it has acquired a special feature, appearing at the crossroads of almost all issues of strategic importance.
discovery.
  The problem is evidenced by the results of the polls. In the current conditions conducted by us in different socio-demographic groups, there is already a need to develop and implement a special target policy aimed at preventing the negative impact of migration risks on young human capital.
  According to us, as well as a number of other researchers, these risks have turned into national security problems in the conditions of education, globalization of markets, activation of mobility.
It should be noted that the theoretical-methodological questions and researches on young human capital as a unique social and economic resource began to be carried out in the middle of the 20th century, and then elaborated with more concretely differentiated perspectives in terms of application.
 In particular, the video-methodological approaches to the definition of physical, human and social capitals, their demarcation and valuation have been developed and substantiated. Culman, J. In the works of other well-known analysts Willis.
methodological methodological evaluation of non-structural components of human problems, but also quantitative measurement.
  The Young Human Capital Measurement Index used by the World Economic Forum is based on indicators from all four main areas. Evaluation is used.
 Health և welfare indicators characterize the հատկintellectual potential characteristics of the physical health of the population, from children to adults.
The indicators of the ության labor force ոլոր labor capacity are the work experience, characteristics and capabilities of the labor force.
are  Indicators of the opportunity environment, most naturally related to capital (the existence of conditions for business reproduction, activity, protection of intellectual property, the ability to use organizational and business capacity, etc.).
It is noteworthy that it is the young people who use informal sources who are most satisfied with the work and income.
  Moreover, the most effective are not the close ties of relatives and friends, but the so-called long-distance ties with acquaintances and friends.
  If weak connections make it possible to significantly expand the range of information, strong connections become more effective in crisis situations when there is a problem of time.
Thus, the success of young people in finding a job is due to the position of young people in the social structure.
  In other words, in addition to the investments made in human capital itself, investments are needed. The structure of connections made by the youth's public relations, along with professional qualifications, becomes the most important economic factor for advancement in the labor market.
Socially oriented.
Development Institutions In the post-Soviet years, the problem of providing young graduates with jobs in our country became significantly more difficult.
  In other words, in the new political situation, the state does not send specialists-young people to decent work in a decentralized manner, but they should look for a job.
  It can be mentioned that the young people turned into businessmen, entrepreneurs, etc., and accepted the principles of market economy development.
to search for the most common self-employment.
  As a result, studies of the unemployment rate show that the fear of unemployment is of interest to employees in terms of job productivity, quality, and so on.
Unemployment of the youth of Armenia can be characterized by several peculiarities. One in five in the country is afraid of production. The production is completely stopped.
Երիտասարդ The young people who are not provided with jobs are mainly 1825 years old.
  If every second young person in the Republic of Armenia is not able to provide for his material needs, he should lose his job.
 The danger of unemployment, the consequences of not having a job, the socio-economic policy of Armenia, the crisis, the irregularities in a number of branches of the state-run economy are serious reasons for young people to leave their birthplace, homeland, go to foreign countries in search of work and social justice.
  Many young people move abroad to try to gain independence from their parents and gain independence.
Ruling in the Republic “In the present period, the flow of youth in the Republic of Armenia is not as sharp as it was in the beginning.
  Among the reasons for the influx of young people during these years, especially in the 1990s, were the Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict, the 1988 earthquake and the "industrial-induced unemployment" [1].
However, as a result of studies, it should be emphasized that emigration in our country includes four regions.
The second period covers the years 1992-1995, when young men of military service age or close to them left the country with about 70-80 thousand families (about 290-320 thousand people) to avoid compulsory military service - Do not die during hostilities.
  During the mentioned period many young people left the republic for reasons, in particular, the darkness and cold prevailing in the country.
The third period refers to 1995-1998, when the republic significantly improved.
  During the mentioned years, an increase in the level of economy was registered in certain spheres, especially in the spheres of trade services.
  However, the inflexible customs-tax policy pursued in those years became the cause of illegal actions of the employees of the judicial bodies, customs and tax departments of the republic, thousands of small and medium-sized businesses left the country with their families.
 It is obvious that the young businessmen who left the republic transferred their money to the corresponding activity.
It is clear that the emigration of young businessmen had a negative impact on the development of the Armenian economy, the increase in the volume of direct capital investments, and the processes of job creation.
    The work of judicial bodies, customs and tax departments was partially regulated only when a large number of young people had already emigrated from the republic.
The fourth period covers 1998-2008.
  About 60-70 thousand families, who are on the verge of poverty, unemployed, just starving, have left the republic, that is, about 250-280 thousand people.
  At present, most of the people from different regions of Armenia, especially from the mountainous regions, who are able to sell the apartment, raise appropriate financial means չունեն have nothing to lose, are ready to leave their birthplace, hometown և their father's house.
According to the National Youth Report of Armenia [3], about half of the Armenian youth (49%) have ever been abroad.
 It is more typical especially for men ևconditioned by a high standard of living, subcultural affiliation լինելու living in the capital.
  At the global level, young migrants make up a total of 232 million (more than 10% of international migrants); being a mobile social group, they make up the bulk of annual migration movements.
  International migration provides young people with the opportunity to provide a better life for themselves, their families, pursue educational aspirations, improve their professional skills, prospects or desire for personal development through the adventures and challenges of living abroad.
 There is high unemployment among young people without having a proper job in the homeland.
  In almost all countries, the youth unemployment rate is at least twice the total unemployment rate, with an estimated 73 million young people unemployed.
Unfortunately, resulting in a very young series of risks. They are often robbed, met with exploitation, and subjected to violence, including forced labor.
  And very often they, like other migrants, become scapegoats because of the shortcomings of economic and social systems.
When young people migrate in conditions of freedom, dignity, justice and security, they can promote economic and social development both in their countries of origin and in their host countries.
  Therefore, the ILO works with all relevant stakeholders.
  One of those parties is the young people themselves.
  Broad partnership, promotion of social dialogue, exchange of good experience և training, ensuring better employment և developing an effective labor migration policy that ensures proper employment for young migrants [6].
According to the hypothesis, the experience of young people abroad is almost the same in "permanently emigrating" and "non-emigrant" groups, which can be assumed that young people's experience of being abroad contributes to the growth of their emigration positions. Most of the emigration positions are Armenian).
In the last three years, 76% of young people 's visits abroad are to only two countries: Russia (46%), Georgia (30%), and according to the goals, 80% of the visits are leisure (46%), work, business ( 34%).
 Moreover, visits to Russia and Georgia alone for these two main purposes account for 60% of all youth visits.
  The high interest rate of young people is mainly explained by the fact that labor migrants have greater obligations to their relatives under other equal conditions.
  For example, a young person who is single is less likely to participate in the formation of family income. he is a "free man."
  And the young man has left for work abroad, then he is among the "feeders" of the family members left in Armenia, if not the only one.
  Moreover, it is known that labor migrants (mainly men in Armenia) have extramarital affairs at the place of seasonal labor migration.
  The existence of these connections in itself hinders the position of migrants to move their relatives from Armenia abroad.
In the context of socio-economic security, young people also have a serious role to play in terms of rapidly changing professional skills.
 In the labor market, in a competitive position are mainly the specialists who quickly respond to the new demands presented by the employer.
  Naturally, young people, who are much easier to grasp innovative ideas, respond to the current demands of the labor market, and do not shy away from undergoing appropriate training by adopting the latest technologies.
 In this regard, if the "rejuvenation" of that capital becomes the result of the whole process of human capital production, the risks of inefficient use of economically active human resources in the domestic market will be reduced to some extent.
Based on all this, in the context of RA socio-economic security, for risk management we find that it is necessary to point the finger at the solution of the following issues: to prevent the process of rejuvenation of young professionals, how to emigrate from the country? employer-young specialist "range of mutual relations expectations.
General conclusion from the theoretical and practical analysis conducted within the framework of this research. In countries with migration traditions, such as the Republic of Armenia, the time has come to develop a solid system of scientific criteria - methodologically sound indicators of specific indicators, the result will reflect the solution of youth problems, human capital reproduction, young labor migration risks.
  Of course, it is a subject of further studies.
  Such comprehensive studies in the Republic of Armenia will contribute to the development and implementation of a relatively long-term, effective migration policy, a policy that will enable the country to benefit from the advantages of external labor migration, as well as its shortcomings in terms of accumulating young human capital and ensuring its expanded reproduction.
