Establishing a new dimension of scientific debate for the discussion of labor-causal labor relations.
It is obvious that the presentation of such a research problem is more than relevant, because the modern world is changing before our eyes.
 Therefore, it is imperative of the time to discuss the logic of the changing world with scientific methodology.
 Research problems.
  According to the set goal, the following research problems were set: solved: • analyze the causes and effects of the global crisis, • discuss the existing concepts in the world social, political, economic, cultural spheres, problems, • consider the foundations of the New World.
Research on a civilized approach that best meets the requirements of synergy.
  And the use of the latter's opportunities is simply dictated by the complexity of the research problem ևmultiplayer.
The methodology was built (literally in half a year) with the first unprecedented application of the year, and the world community faced a deep crisis.
  The rapid spread of the virus called COVID-19 և to prevent it ընթաց paralyzed the normal course of human metaphorical society.
  But the whole question is whether the epidemic was the cause of such a collapse or humanity had reached such a crisis point that the epidemic was just an occasion.
  In other words, it affected the already exhausted, sick elements of the ruling society in the co-credit system.
  Then again the question arises whether the epidemic does not play the role of a necessary "sanitary" on the way to building a future New World.
  And the last question: is humanity ready to overcome the crisis by radically transforming the worn-out elements of the system, building a completely new system accordingly, or will the solutions be temporary by the old logic?
  And in that case, will there be no more non-epidemic crisis waves?
Let us try to construct the answers to the above-mentioned questions on the above-mentioned logical basis.
First, take as a starting point human civilization under the influence of modern specialists has already developed as a single system, which is characterized by both the perception of a common destiny and the generality of system-building elements.
Globalization So the pandemic that caused the systemic crisis simply cannot be the root cause.
  It was just an opportunity to infect the system-building basic components that had been exhausted and to inhibit normal development.
 Only in this case, one phenomenon, one factor can cause a systemic crisis.
Therefore, it is more than realistic to claim that in the logic of causal relations, the epidemic was only a step backwards in the chain of "ensuring" a systemic crisis of system-building components in crisis.
Zhoronken's final infection? And the already created components of the system, the current stage of development of which led to a systemic crisis?
 To answer this question, one must consider the political, economic, and cultural concepts that condition the modern realities of the world.
Accordingly, it must be stated that the prevailing geopolitical, geoeconomic and geocultural agendas prevailing in the world today were built and imposed on the 12 value bases of Western civilization, where liberalism is the key.
 Therefore, the cause of the crisis (s) must be sought in the exhaustion of the last system-building, basic provisions.
  In our opinion, they are the following key issues: in politics - tolerance - democracy, in the economy - the modern nature of supply and demand - the provision of market relations based on it, in the field of cultivation - human rights.
Liberalism has seen and overcome many crises during its more than 300 years of existence.
  This has been achieved through the re-interpretation of the above-mentioned provisions, the new interpretation of the recharge, due to the different currents of liberalism.
  As a result, tolerance, democracy, economic liberalization, human rights 12 We use the term based on prevailing approaches.
 According to the new scientific approach, it is the Christian-avant-garde type of the Christian ruling class of non-local civilizations.
 [1,2] were absolute և were radicalized.
  They are no longer (could not) withstand real crises.
 Of course, the ones listed are not the same, but in our opinion, they are the best ones, they can provide the necessary basis for social-scientific debate.
And so, in the political sphere, it was first and foremost the radicalization of the ideology of tolerance.
  The fact that tolerance should play a significant role in the domestic foreign policy of states, should neutralize it in any aspect of nationalism, genocide, is an axiom.
 However, it was radicalized at the expense of national institutions, nation-states, their borders and functions.
  An attempt was made to tolerate the complete technical "erasure" of nation-states, packed with tolerance, provided by globalization.
  In international relations, political integration has become not a natural but an end in itself, a key tool for ranking states and controlling their behavior.
Moreover, the states in various ways renounced their functions, voluntarily ceding them to supranational structures and supranational companies.
The slogan "World without Borders" had a dominant role. It was being destroyed on the basis of national identity, total destruction of national belonging.
  Through the extremism of tolerance, citizens were brought up whose approach and consciousness were subordinated to discipline and obedience.
  As a result, in the regions dictating such a political culture, the functional viability of the nation-states was severely limited, which was considered "progressive" and imposed on the rest of the world.
In the series of conventions, Hamavarak showed the ruling political parties against the powerful cultural-centric powers.
 China, with a population of 1.5 billion, as the epicenter of the epidemic, was able to solve the problem much faster, and the countries with totalitarian regimes - Russia, Belarus, Cuba - not only allowed the least democracy, but also showed tolerance and international aid.
  The foundations of the view that democratic democracy absolutely ensures individual security were shaken.
  In practice, it became clear that the democratization extremism could bring incompetent, irresponsible mob leaders to power.
As a result of all this, the borders of the nation-states were hardened and the state structures were reopened in the instinctive way of reacting quickly during the epidemic crisis.
  In isolated countries, there were (g) reasonable manifestations of national sentiments, national consolidation, which were previously strongly condemned, considered a "symptom" of the lumpen class, a retrospective worldview.
Therefore, in the future, the provisions for national identification and national states will be strengthened.
  In any case, the possibility of a complete restart of the political culture is quite high, it will become a key tool in the future international relations.
    But there is another danger here.
The rapid devaluation of the axes of the prevailing political culture can lead to chaos, emptiness, which can lead to totalitarian regimes.
  In other words, we can see the other manifestation of the extremism of political culture.
  The exclusion of the latter will also become a key part of the international political agenda.
In turn, the ideas of liberalization were first "affected" in the economic sphere.
  The first blow was dealt to the health sector, the development of which was also based on the simple principles of liberalism - ensuring profitability on the basis of supply and demand.
  As a result, the constant optimizations, reductions in medical staff, beds, and the high involvement of the private sector in funding have shown that liberal health care is overburdened.
The goal of tough measures to prevent the spread of the epidemic was to save the collapsing healthcare system from total destruction.
23 The fact that the epidemic will cause a deep global economic crisis is no longer in doubt.
 Any pessimistic scenario put forward in a few days is already considered optimistic, updated with more pessimistic forecasts.
  Therefore, it is simply impossible to talk about the mechanisms of overcoming the economic crisis at this moment, as the global economic crisis is in a free fall, the cessation of which is not yet noticeable.
However, according to experts, the crisis only accelerated the prospect of the collapse of the world economy, the prospect of new reconstruction, the existing economic ideas and realities have already created a fairly stable base for a deep economic crisis.
Among the existing problems we will emphasize the following: formation of artificially consuming supply and demand society, overheating of accumulated free capital stock exchanges, formation of "economic bubbles", the regular explosion of which replaced the natural cycles of economic development;
Stimulation - According to experts. "Everything in the economy is based on the idea of ​​growth.
 Economic growth occurs as a result of that excess consumption.
 Man really does not need this consumer bouquet, but it is the basis of today's geo-economic growth.
  Network organizations, corporations, all these giants are able to survive.
to that surplus account.
[23] Of course, it would not have been possible to do so without the ever-increasing fuel economy. Financial markets և their tools allow capital to multiply continuously, creating financial bubbles, and the banking system allows people, not having the appropriate means today, the means of consumption, thus ensuring today's (economic) growth of consumption.
34 Necessity Today, the neoliberals themselves point to the nature of the challenges that threaten global change.
45 According to them, liberalism has faced similar crises before, but it has always been stronger.
  However, today the crisis is more serious, because in the past the liberals were able to offer effective solutions to the problems of the society, but today they are not.
"Accordingly, humanity must now solve this problem, create a" new history "for the world.
  Just as new ideologies emerged during the Industrial Revolution, so the ongoing changes in the information biotechnology sector require a completely new theory of economics.
The crisis was expressed in the field of Cultivation, as we have already mentioned, deepening rights ”due to the over-extremism of the concept.
  It should be noted that the value base of generally prevailing liberalism is based on the fundamental rights of the individual - life, freedom - private property.
  However, over time, these notions - the ideologues of political liberalism - saw the way to overcome the crises that regularly arose as individualized.
"Human-Economic Quote from Tigran Zarikyan's Analysis [11] 45 Prior to the outbreak, such signals included Trump's protectionism, the Brexit victory in Britain, the critique of Jacob Atale's Emanuel Macron's" Critical remarks " See [6]) George Sorosian Concerns, reflected in his rather daring work, The Crisis of Global Capitalism.
  "Open society is in danger."
They became not only human rights but also the absolute capitalization of the rights of universal religious minorities և political capitalization.
  The rights of children, women's rights and other sexual concepts were separated from the gradual rights.
targets of political and economic capitalization in their own societies, but also powerful geopolitical tools for exercising control.
 Various conventions were created, which were primarily aimed at limiting the state functions and sovereignty of countries by handing them over to transnational organizations.
  Cultural liberalism led to the final immorality of societies.
In their separate neo-colonial world, without the merit of responsibility, only law-abiding citizens more and more often relied on instinctive needs, creating models of "happy" societies with materialistic, consuming, primitive values.
  And economic and political liberalism was constantly being modified in order to be able to feed the "monsters" it had created, so that it could also be reproduced.
  As a result, in developed, "happy" European countries, the balance between the "show business star of the doctor, the producer, the banker, the teacher, the marketing and social status" has long been upset.
Satisfactory If we add to the above-mentioned the problems accumulated in the environmental sphere, which were sharply alleviated in the conditions of total quarantine, then the assertion that this crisis may և should play the role of "sanitary" may have a right to exist.
  In fact, today the economic and social notions with the geopolitical perception have been damaged, which have exhausted themselves.
In this case, the question arises. Is humanity ready to radically change the above-mentioned notions, to completely re-evaluate its own process, or will there be temporary solutions to the existing problems, to have a regular Restart of the system?
Judging by the available signals, the situation is not encouraging.
 As there is a repeated attempt in the economic sphere to stimulate artificial consumption through the financial-banking system, again an attempt packed with tolerance is made to establish world domination.
56 And in this case the future epidemic (not only) crises will inevitably be more, pervasive, more dangerous, more destructive.
We see the problem in a radical change in our way of life.
  In other words, the time has come to build a new World.
 The time has come for small children.
  Of course, humanity cannot come to such an awareness instantly.
  However, the existing and expected crises will force that change.
  Therefore, today we must prepare, today we must define our dream with the future worldview, the "Armenian dream".
  And the latter is another research problem, which we will address through another article.
