"Charents' talent was like a ship rising on a rough sea, which, nevertheless, sees the lighthouse burning from afar, goes to the coveted shores" [3], - this is Hrant Tamrazyan's opinion about Yeghishe Charents.
  And indeed, one of the most brilliant representatives of Armenian poetry, Charents, sometimes touches on the themes presented in his works from so many different angles that it is hard to believe that their author is the same poet.
 Despite that, the poet's handwriting betrays him, հնարավոր It is possible not to confuse Charents with someone else.
  The fiery temperament of the poet finds its reflection in the poems, being more expressed in the variety of themes, as well as in the variety of poetic characters and types of rhyme.
 The aim of the work is to show the peculiarities of Charents' poems, the interesting selection of rhymes and rhymes.
  The article is important in that Charents' poems written in stable forms are studied in detail, mainly from a grammatical point of view.
There are a number of Oriental poetry in the "Book of Knowledge" series.
 "In this book, he combined all his grammatical searches, achieving a result that was unparalleled in richness, composition, and multi-layeredness."
  The series opens with "Charents-typical originality" quatrains, which Charents titled "Rubayiner".
  These four are numbered twenty-four և are numbered in Armenian capital letters.
  Thematically, in quartets one can notice inner connection.
 Quartets from A to JE [4] about being wise.
  Charents speaks in the second person.
  In general, these quatrains are addressed to someone.
 But the question arises: to whom, to the reader, to the imaginary listener, or even to God?
  The solution to this problem is given by the quartet Z, from which it becomes clear that Charents is talking to himself. You learned from ZD Teryan to listen to the murmur of the spirit, Another endless melody - Tumanyan's flame ignites your unquenchable fire.
Charents used the rhyme aaba in his quatrains.
But this rhyme acquires interesting features in Charents.
  To see them more clearly, let's count the last words of the quartets XIII, XD, XTE XT, which are "responsible" for the rhyme. preaching, beast, nineteen, big, circus, terrible, in.
The "quatrain rhyme" has no special features.
  In this case, we wrote it to emphasize the features of the other quartets.
  ԺThe quartet has an exact rhyme [5].
 The study is interesting when we pay attention to the other quartets և their approximate rhythms [5].
  In the case of an approximate rhyme, similar sounds or different sounds are used to create a rhyme, which, placed next to the vowels, create the rhyme.
 The 14th quartet և has aaba rhyme ․ But why, if it is clear that the first line has the -uk ending, and the second-fourth lines rhyming with it in -uk.
  The point is that in order to rhyme the orphan poem, first of all it had to be voiced.
  The consonants only give extra beauty և perform a restorative function.
Consequently, it is not the consonants -k մm that carry the burden of creating a rhyme in the 14th quartet, but the vowel-u- of the last syllables.
 It should be noted that in this case it is easy to use interlocking sounds.
  For example, in the JE quartet, the sounds -t, -r, have a calm tone of pronunciation.
From this point of view, it is interesting to choose the words of the first, second and fourth lines in the nineteenth quartet: big, circus, in.
  Of course, the first question that may arise is that the sounds -ts, -s և -j are not similar to each other, և the poem could be constructed by choosing other words.
  However, these sounds are more similar than can be imagined.
 The point is that young children pronounce skam j instead of ts.
  And the talented poet absorbs the sounds.
  So, poetry is a completely successful work from this grammatical point of view.
In addition to the choice of sounds, we must pay attention to the rhyme, the words, their meanings, if we are dealing with a poet like Charents.
  In this case, the quartets are obtained because the poet has combined several circumstances.
  Charents combined such sounds, guessed the most accurate word, which has a strong sound for the rhyme - participates in the meaning of the line and the whole quartet.
Unique rhymes have a special place in Charents' poems, due to which it is difficult to determine the type of rhyme.
  "The rhyme starts with the last stressed vowel, so it is not possible to form a rhyme only with the last stressed vowel," M. has such a position. Analyzing Tumanyan's poems, Abeghyan said, "As Tumanyan put it," the rays-gorge "," the darkness-Debed "are not related to each other.
  They do not even form a voice.
  For the tunes there should have been the rays of the night or the gorge, so's the dark pit or Debed. ”[1]
  The second quartet of the "Rubayat" series is a typical example to better understand what has been said. Your every moment is a seed, which carries its death in it. But your soul is joyful and secure. And it is always enthusiastic and warm.
The lines of the quartet have only female rhymes.
 Focusing only on the last vowels, we can say that the quartet has either abaa or aaaa (taking into account the ability of the "h" և "e" vowels to rhyme with each other).
  However, following Abeghyan, in order to determine the rhyme, the vowel of the penultimate syllable must be kept in the center of attention, because they are the ones that are emphasized.
  The penultimate and last vowels of the lines are as follows: First line - e, e, Second line - a, h, Third line - a, e, Fourth line - e, e.
In addition to vowels, the last words և consonants come to the rescue.
 As Ed. Jrbashyan notes that not only the pronunciation but also the semantic side of the rhyme is used. "Rhyme often plays a significant semantic role.
 The poets try to put բառերը rhyming words at the end of the verses, which attract more attention due to the repetitive sounds ”[6].
 The words "it is a seed" in the first-fourth lines և "it is warm" are almost the same in pronunciation (except for the first consonants only) են they are rhyming with each other.
 Although the third line ends with the same consonant as the first և the fourth, it nevertheless ends with the second line, not the latter.
  First, the penultimate vowels of the two lines are the same, և second, the words "death" և "anah is" at the end of the line are similar in pronunciation.
  It turns out that the quartet has an abba ring rhyme.
  Thus, in the case of the feminine և approximate rhyme weave, the lines, even if they have the same vowel in the last syllable, may not be rhyming with each other.
There are forty-four in the "Rubayat" series written in 1926.
 The series is called "Rubayat", which is the plural snow of ruba (quartet) [7] և means quartets.
  The first feature that immediately catches the eye is the volume of the lines.
 There are quatrains written in short and long lines in this series.
The second to fourteenth to twenty-seventh quatrains are written in short letters, and the rest are long.
Quartets written in short lines have eight to ten syllables in the lines.
  In long lines of quatrains, the number of syllables varies from thirteen to twenty.
  The most insignificant feature of these quartets is that there are feminine tones.
  There are such rhymes in quatrains with short and long lines.
  Charents' quartets, being written by combining the male Uyghur rhymes with precise and approximate rhymes, have unique rhymes.
 Thus, the aaaa rhyme of the II quatrain և all lines end in a feminine rhyme (it is a seed, death, immortal, warm).
  In the VII quartet there is a ring rhyme, only the second and third of the lines have a singular rhyme (intersection, he finds).
  And here is the XVII quartet, which again has the rhyme aaba, but only the first, second and fourth rhymes have a female rhyme.
 Another important feature of this quartet is that the mentioned rhyming rhyme is created by the use of the same word.
He left and came again - my favorite lover of yesterday, But I saw that he was no more - my favorite lover of yesterday.
There is a third person standing in front of me այդ - that's not him և, նա նա նա նա նա նա նա նա նա նա է է է է սիր սիր սիր սիր սիր սիր սիր սիր սիր։։։
The rhyme of some quartets written with "exact" approximate rhymes can be divided into two types at once.
For example, it can be assumed that the third quartet, written in short lines, has the rhyme "aaaa," abab. It is both life and death - the moment The world is blinking incessantly - and it is not.
First, the fact that the first line follows the same rhyme after the third, and the second line rhymes with the fourth, is striking.
Looking at it from this point of view, we will say that the quartet has an aba-b rhyme.
 But a closer look can open up another horizon.
  The reason is that all the lines of the quartet are related to each other by approximate rhymes, they are created similarly with the help of vowels.
Paying attention to this, we can say without hesitation that the quartet also has a rhyme.
Charents did not choose any principle to use feminine rhymes.
  Thus, in the twelfth quartet only the female rhyme of the third line, in the seventh quartet the second և third, in the sixth the first և third, in the third all the lines, in the tenth the second third, the eleventh the first line.
  In some quartets, which have an aaba rhyme, Charents ends the rhyming lines with a female rhyme.
  Such is the quartet XXXIII.
  And here are all the lines of XXIX, XXX, XXXI, XXXII, XXXIV, XXXV, XXVI quartets with unique rhymes.
A number of Charents' quatrains end with a refrain.
Such are almost all the quartets written in long lines.
 Some quatrains, where not only the last part of the line is repeated, but also some lines can start with the same word.
  Such are the quartets XXXVII և XXXV.
Only yesterday your mind was dark, - you are already wise now ․You have seen this huge creator, - you are already wise now ․You have seen the kitchen of history, you are drunk in the gutters and you know who the cook is ․․․ You are wise now.
If the words and phrases repeated at the end of the lines are closely related to the rhyme (for example, the words repeated in the rhyming quatrains aab-a և's second Armenian ահայ quadrilaterals are rhyming in the first, lines), then there is no pattern in the case of repetitive words written at the beginning.
  As we can see, the repetitive sentence at the end of the above quatrain coincides with the rhyming lines, and the "you saw" sentence at the beginning of the lines is not internally related to the rhyme.
  In other quartets with the rhyme aab-a this phenomenon occurs several times ․ XXXVIII The first third lines begin with the word "you", XXXIX second և third lines begin with the word "with it", XL second և third lines begin with the word "that".
If we add to the conclusion.
  Charents knew well the rhythmic features of the Armenian language.
The talent for making thematic choices, it will not be difficult to guess why Charents' poems are always of interest to analysts.
 In the quartets, different tones are intertwined with a special egg, due to which it becomes "interesting" to determine the type of rhyme.
 Approximate rhymes are used in Charents' quartets.
  The poet uses not only the ability to pronounce sounds, but also chooses words that complement each other in terms of meaning.
  Charents was able to adapt different adaptations to the opportunities provided by the Armenian language, thus enriching both Armenian and world poetry.
