Examination of relevant phrases in modern philological studies.
  The term "phrase" is understood in a narrow sense.
  "The connection of words, which appears as a semantic-expressive version. moreover, when the meaning of the components of a phrase is lost in the general (phraseual) meaning, we are dealing with an idiom (special expression), and if the components still retain an independent meaning, then their wholeness is a regular conjunction ”[6, 81].
  The strong connections that exist between phrases, sayings, proverbs, circles, colloquial words, stable word combinations, to call multilingual phrases collectively.
 It should be noted that the stimulus for linguists to classify these other questions is the limitations of phraseology, the differentiation of phraseological units, the semantic, grammatical philologists do not agree; they express disagreement in the issue of specific definition and recognition.
  We share the common view of linguists, who, by bringing convincing arguments, suggest combining a number of linguistic practices.
  What is more important for us is overcoming the existing chasm, a new approach, as well as launching in-depth, up-to-date new studies of phrases, their translation, and compiling dictionaries.
In our opinion, vulgar phrases and vulgarities are equally used today in everyday-conversational style, family-household word-layer և in artistic speech.
There is an opinion that the use of vulgarities and vulgar phrases is inadmissible for the literary language.
  It has a negative impact on language culture, so it is necessary to limit their use in functional styles.
  Let us add that in the works of many, many modern writers one can see many slang words and expressions, sociologies.
  We believe that the frequent, inappropriate application of vulgar phrases and vulgarities can have a pedagogical and anti-educational effect.
 L. Yezekyan writes. "No matter how stylistic the eloquent ones are, their use in very few cases can have an aesthetic justification. people, their thinking and the process of communication, and in other cases they have a negative impact not only on the speech art of the work of art, its language culture, but also on educational, ուց educational, առավել and more's artistic reasons ”[3, 156].
  If in the past vulgarities, vulgarities were incomprehensible or their use was encouraged to a society incomprehensible to them, today they are perceived by the public.
Let's present some vulgar phrases in "HayastorStor"'s phraseological dictionary of the language, bring interesting examples of usage from the fiction literature, using the "Ar-Aak" (Ar-Armenian National Corpus) database.
 Thus, to smell the mouth [8, 119] - to swear, to swear, to swear, to eat a donkey, to grow a donkey [8, 226] - to receive a rough, ungrateful upbringing, to be rude by birth, to be ungrateful (think only about eating) in drinking spring water to spit [8, 288] - to be found to be ungrateful, to be a carrot [8, 486] - a girl as tough as a man, to earn a fortune [8, 459] - illegitimate, greedy, shameless.
"Are not England and France enemies?" Asked Dolgorukov, shocked by what he heard.
- Yes, in other cases they bite each other's throats, but they lick each other's worries to isolate the Turks from us, to turn the Turks against us.
(Sero Khanzadyan "Mkhitar Sparapet") [11] - What, what did he say, Barkhudar is a man of what he said, isn't he the one who cares?
(Shirvanzade "Namus") [11] - You idiot, who do you put in the place of a donkey and give out a donkey-donkey, and put the Armenians in the place of a donkey with your donkey?
(Vahe Avetyan from "Desits-denits") [11] There is no doubt that the stylistic value of phrases in literary speech is great.
  Vulgar phrases, vulgarities have a certain stylistic purpose, և their use requires special attention in addition to being purposeful.
  E. The description of Gorgyan's situations requires the use of different choices of phrases "[2, 31].
"Differentiation": There are several ways to translate vulgar phrases, that is, adequate translation, phrase matching, descriptive translation [3, 209].
  To avoid translation errors, it is necessary to master these methods, principles, to find out whether vulgar phrases are expressed in the same way, have their equivalents (absolute or approximate) in another language.
  All this in itself requires making a tasteful choice of equivalents, which requires a thorough acquaintance with the subtleties of the phrases of the translatable language, the other stylistic aspects [2, 40].
  Let's add that each phrase had the peculiarity of translatability.
Let's bring A. Sukiasyan, S. The corresponding English translations of the vulgar phrases evidenced in the Galstyan language-linguistic dictionary.
 Thus, we present "Armenian-Eats - eat meat - grate / jar upon sb's ear; din in (into) sb's ears; offend sb's ear… bash sb's ear (very begging or repeating to annoy), անբան անասուն - a headless nail; a useless person; all thumbs; a couchpotato (lazy, apical man), starve to death (starving), as hungry to starve - starve to death; die of hunger (starvation), laze duck (poor, miserable), pulled from the grave (out) - bury; commit to the earth… deadcolor; become cadaverous; deadly pale (severely exhausted, thin, dull), head full of medicine - he is a giddy-pate; feather-brain; scatter-brain; giddy goat (fool, idiot, fool), make the face of buffalo skin make dog skin - to setone's face like a flint, two master's servant one's back, hump up the back (severe anger, fury, rage), scatter the rage - use bad language (naughty, slurred speech, swearing) to see with crooked eyes - a nod is as good as a wink to a blind horse to eat vomit like a dog - (to break a promise), to put on or get dirty pants - scare the pants off sb. (severely frightened), The above-mentioned phrases, in fact, have the same or close meaning, stylistic correspondence. two master's servant - two ban's servant (simultaneously servant of two, advocate for two, servant of two masters), gnaw on the flesh - go bananas, hump one's back, hump up the back bad language (slurred speech, swearing) to see with blindfolded eyes - a nod is as good as a wink to a blind horse (for sure, it is certain), to eat vomit like a dog - (to break a promise), to throw or get dirty pants the pants off sb. (severely frightened), The above-mentioned phrases, in fact, have the same or close meaning, stylistic correspondence. two master's servant - two ban's servant (simultaneously servant of two, advocate of two, servant of two masters), gnaw on the flesh - go bananas, hump one's back, hump up the back (get very angry, furious, furious), scatter bad language (slurred speech, swearing) to see with the naked eye - a nod is as good as a wink to a blind horse (for sure, it is certain), to eat the vomit like a dog - (to break a promise), to put on pants or get dirty - scare the pants off sb. (severely frightened), The above-mentioned phrases, in fact, have the same or close meaning, stylistic correspondence. scatter - use bad language - to see with blindfolded - a nod is as good as a wink to a blind horse, to eat vomit like a dog - (promise to be broken), pants pour or soak - scare the pants off sb. (severely frightened), The above-mentioned phrases, in fact, have the same or close meaning, stylistic correspondence. scatter - use bad language - to see with blindfolded - a nod is as good as a wink to a blind horse, to eat vomit like a dog - (promise to be broken), pants pour or soak - scare the pants off sb. (severely frightened), The above-mentioned phrases, in fact, have the same or close meaning, stylistic correspondence.
 It is noticeable that when translating or finding equivalent vulgar phrases in English, they sometimes lose their very offensive nature, getting a soft coloring (like a door dog - peace and quiet), and sometimes intensify (dog earnings - son of a bitch).
  Phrases in which one component has changed, but the meaning has been preserved, such as donkey wit - as silly / stupid as a goose, lucky - devil, as stubborn as amule, etc.
and the equivalence of metaphors Often in different languages, due to different notions, it is expressed with completely different components [2, 42].
  In order to achieve a complete translation in this issue, it is necessary to edit the context as well.
 The context determines the "narrow" or "broad" meaning of the translated text words, which և will form the sentence expressing the necessary meaning [4, 117].
 It emphasizes the specific content of the word, phrase, phrase, phrase, utterance, as well as the expressiveness.
  Let's bring examples from English literature և translate, separate the vulgar phrases in them.
  Thus, "Finally, the legacy of law," replied Tom, muttering.
"The dog is lucky," said Martin.
 I wish I was in his place.
(Ch. Dickens "Martin Chezlvit") To have a lucky dog ​​- lucky dog ​​/ devil (lucky, very lucky).
That prodigal son is a real captain, there is no doubt.
(R. Stevenson "The Slayer") Born of a dog - son of a bitch, son of a gun (son of a prostitute.
"Cousin, you are lying deceitfully," Dennis replied contemptuously.
(R. Stevenson "New Arabian Nights") Lie in one's mouth - lie in one's teeth / throat (lie bag, liar, liar).
- Why did you put it on your nose?
- He was the first to give me a nose-fight.
"Where did you swear at him?"
- Just a itchy dog, nothing else.
Kosot (J. Galsvoru's "Silver Spoon") dog - dirty dog ​​(swearing, contemptuous expression addressed to man).
In linguistic Armenian, it is relevant to give a statistical description of the Russian language.
 2008 published P. Sahakyan's "Dictionary of frequently used idioms", where the author presents the phrases with high frequency in English.
  This group of phrases has mostly withstood the test of time.
  During this period, some phrases lost their use of the stage, the field of use, paving the way for other linguistic realities.
 The following are much more commonly used today than vulgar phrases: to spit on everything - to spit on everything (to give up everything, to give up everything, to refuse to do anything or to open anything), to enter a coffin - bury; commit to the earth, dig a grave for sb (die, seal the mortal), do not care - I do not care a red cent for; not to care a brass button (fig, rap), ash silly / stupid as a goose (stupidity, stupidity), dog mouth - use bad language (obscenely swear), dog merit - son of shame (illegitimate, greedy, shameless).
The study shows that in Armenian there are many vulgar phrases, vulgarities in Armenian, the translation of which is done according to clear principles and methods.
  When translating, it is necessary to take into account the linguistic and non-linguistic factors, to have a powerful set of tools. Fluent in both languages, cultural values, literature.
  Vulgar phrases, vulgarities have a special scope of use.
  This group of phrases is little studied as well as translated.
  Such studies provide an opportunity to put forward practical solutions to the translation and dissemination of phrases, revealing very interesting linguistic and cultural realities.
