Culture is a world of biocompatible values, it includes the purpose and inner meaning of human activity, the discovery and development of human forces.
  The care and culture of culture are conditioned by the context of reality, not by idealistic values.
 Socio-cultural life should create a beautiful world of harmony, which is real only in human society [1].
  Culture is to create and cultivate Latin cultura from the root.
  It can be defined as a set of material "values" created "created by man" that constitutes its social existence.
  This approach to defining culture leads to the identification of the concepts of "culture" and "society", which is undoubtedly wrong.
In order to start a cultural-cultural dialogue with the help of sociology, one must first know the culture of the "other", then move away from mutually exclusive values ​​and interests. Define the general field: common values, common goals, common practice, common scale of values.
  It is this socio-cultural "space" that is clinically acceptable to both, to communicate and understand each other [2].
The idea of ​​dividing social culture into mass և elite cultures was later raised by Max Horkheimer և Theodore Adorno.
  They coined the term culture-industry to describe the uniform innovations produced by industrial machinery in the fields of art, fine arts, literature, and cinema.
According to them, the main goal of the culture created as a result of such an industry was not to educate people, but to divert them from everyday problems, as well as to block the creative mind that initiates.
  In the same way, they criticized films and cartoons based on clever tricks.
From a cultural point of view, social culture includes a thought-provoking creative process, along with the thought-provoking values ​​created by works of art, scientific discoveries, religious teachings, and so on.
 From the point of view of ethnography, the traditional way of life, folklore, national art and dance of the given people, calendar holidays, customs, beliefs and rituals, family, social ills, knowledge about nature, ideas, etc. are of value to the social culture. [5]
Depending on the level and scale of the development of social relations of the society, a number of types of culture are distinguished.
The main types of culture are as follows: InHuman culture, which was created during the development of human history և throughout its existence.
Superculture or superculture created in a certain society։ is passed down from generation to generation.
Subculture, which is a set of beliefs, values, norms of behavior, typical of individual social groups, associations, for example, nationalities, working-professional groups.
Counterculture, which is a culture of separate groups, is in conflict with the superculture / superculture / that exists in the society.
Deviant culture, which is a variety of subcultures, typical of delinquent people, such as deviant cultures.
BehaviorPersonal culture, which implies the culture of individual individuals.
Historically, high-elite, "mass" types of culture have been formed.
  Elite popular culture includes, first and foremost, man-made works of art and material values ​​created by professionals.
 Elite culture included literature, fine arts, music, etc.
Folk or mass culture includes folklore, songs, dances, myths, fairy tales, which were created in people's daily lives and activities.
  As a rule, the elite culture was created ևsatisfies the needs of a small number of people, while meeting the needs of human beings.
In the modern world, the development of the mass media has given rise to another type of culture, the mass culture, which was created to meet the needs of a large number of people for universal consumption.
The representatives of the structural-functionalist theory, in particular T. According to Parsons, culture is viewed from the point of view of cultural determinism, that is, culture is the basis for the operation of spheres.
The terms Culture ախ Culture այնքան have so many nuances in Armenian that they are different.
In particular, the notion of "cultural person" is equivalent to the notion of "cultural person".
  The word "culture" in the Armenian society is associated with artistic and creative values, art վ other և visual և emotional expressions.
    In fact, culture is a broader and deeper understanding.
    It includes everything that the human being has created during his activity.
  The chair on which you are sitting, the suit you wore on your last bell, the poem that the little boy is reciting are part of the culture.
    Even the label on a vodka bottle is a culture.
The term "culture" is related to other sociological terms that are widely studied by sociological theories, in particular, subculture, cultural value, pop culture, culturology, inculturation.
  In this sense, culture is all the material, caring values, customs, knowledge and skills aimed at the preservation and development of the individual և society։.
  The term "culture" is sometimes associated with referring to peoples of a certain historical period.
  In particular, terms are often used in primitive culture, ancient culture, Aztec culture, Armenian culture, etc., which to some extent identify the concepts of society and culture [11].
և We For example, if one of the main ideas of Sociology is cultural relativism թն ethnocentrism.
   In the case of relativism, any event is considered in the context of a particular culture value system, period, historical-cultural mentality.
habits և patterns of behavior from the point of view of Western values, they will seem cruel և meaningless.
    And from the point of view of the Eastern value system, Western values ​​will be considered at least immoral.
  The other most important concept is the cultural universal.
    Universality is a phenomenon that is understandable to those who carry a particular society or culture.
  It is re-credited, at the same time it is concrete.
In particular, when we say mother, we imagine a certain image, which is understandable for any member of the society.
    At the same time, everyone has their own ideas of the mother, which differ from the ideas of others, because for each of them, the ideas and perceptions of the mother were formed under the influence of a specific social environment և life experience [4].
Countries with densely populated indigenous minorities have some experience in resolving ethno-social conflicts.
 At the end of the 20th century քաղաքական At the beginning of the 21st century, political agreements were reached (for example, in Northern Ireland).
  Cultural identity was created with elements of political autonomy (in Scotland և Wales, in the Basque Country և in Catalonia, in the Francophone Quebec of Canada).
  The most important factor in the political mobilization of indigenous peoples was the demand for the preservation of linguistic, in general, cultural identity (especially in Wales, Brittany, France, northern Finland, Norway, Sweden, where the Samaritan people live).
 Institutions of "nations without states" within the "ethnic minorities" that are part of the political associations of nation-states (with the exception of national-political shocks).
  Conflicts over immigration have decreased over the last ten years, albeit due to "disruptions" in those processes.
  Such a shift to a phase of dialogue (from a heated confrontation to a fading confrontation) can be seen as a positive achievement of intergovernmental agreements.
  Such shifts, however, coincided with the unresolved issues of other non-Western civilized immigrants being identified with Western European societies.
  For some migrants, cross-cultural identity (Cross cultural identity - an identity that incorporates and merges elements of different cultural traditions into one whole) has become a conscious choice to adapt to a new cultural environment.
 But for many immigrants, the value system of Western society remains unconditional, moreover, often unacceptable.
  And not only do they not seek to "settle down" in the Western world, but in every way they emphasize their intention, their originality.
In the face of cultural isolation, socio-immigrants inevitably become ready to accept being in the social "periphery" of the host country and consolidating their position there.
marginalization.
At the same time, to maintain one's own external influence on cultures or to disrupt them through social interactions, which can also produce changes in cultural practice.
  Resource warfare or competition can affect technological development or social dynamics.
  In addition, cultural ideas can be transmitted from one society to another through diffusion.
  For example, hamburgers seemed to be exotic when brought to China.
  The social-diversity of innovation theory represents a research-based model, cultures adopt new ideas, practice ևProduction.
Sociological culture has different meanings, but in this context it refers to the replacement of the features of one culture with another, as happened during the process of Native American colonization with many indigenous peoples of the world.
  Processes related to the individual level include assimilation (individual acceptance of another culture) և reproduction.
  The transnational flow of culture has played a major role in uniting different cultures, ideas, and beliefs.
