The Middle East is one of the hottest geopolitical centers in the world.
  The civilizational and economic interests of the world power centers, which were served by local players, have almost always been opposed here, and have regularly led to a radical change in the political map of the region.
  Here we must thoroughly acknowledge the fact that as a result of these changes, the subjects of the region that have almost always won have clearly defined their own interests, the system of priorities for their realization - the best combination with the geopolitical ambitions of the Earth.
  Consequently, every subject in the region (civilized, political, ethnic) is willy-nilly involved in the big geopolitical game.
  The whole problem is whether they act as an active subject realizing their own geopolitical priorities or as a passive objective serving the interests of others.
Due to the modern development of the centers, the Middle East is entering the stage of geopolitical turbulent processes, with the escalation of military conflicts, the emergence of new hotspots, the change of large-scale intensive intensive balances of population movement, resulting in a new political mapping.
It is by arguing the above-mentioned realities that the demands of the presentity and timeliness of this research are completed, which in general can formulate a social order for the political circles, that is, to express the expected geopolitical and geopolitical developments taking place in the region.
The aim of this study is to identify և assess the potential of the Armenian geopolitics ՝ in the context of the changes taking place in the Middle East's geopolitical structure.
Content Based on the research goal, the following research problems were proposed: • Solve the content of the existing geopolitical projects on the Middle East region, • Discuss the objective and subjective factors of changing the content of the geopolitical structure of the region, identify the opportunities,
The research is built on an exclusively theoretical component of the methodology, where the key task is to ensure the objectivity of scientific prediction.
 For example, by using the methods of pre-analysis and comparison, the patterns of development of the elements of the predicted geopolitical objects became known, and with the help of their already extrapolated (exported) methods.
  In addition, the scientific methods of scientific modeling were used in the research.
The state of interpolation (interpolation) has been revealed. For the solution of the first two research problems, we have taken the "Middle East յուս North African Regional Architecture" as a basis. The results of a large-scale study of geopolitical risks, regional order, and internal transformations [13, 14] conducted in 2016-2019 by an international consortium of universities in Europe, leading research centers in the Middle East and Northern Europe.
The main results of the latter are reflected in the comprehensive report "Options for the Middle East and the Future of North Africa".
And so, for the Greater Middle East, two development scenarios are distinguished: "Horizon-2025" and "Horizon-2050" perspectives.
  The first is assessed from the perspective of modeling contemporary trends in the socio-economic, political and military spheres of the region.
  The second scenario is considered as a target - "megatrend" [13], ie it represents the desired future of the Greater Middle East.
  Therefore, as a targeted result of system development, it is cleansed of modern system-destroying factors, undesirable processes.
Thus, the two scenarios are different, և the second is not a logical continuation of the first.
In the framework of this research, we will consider only the results of the first "Horizon-2025", as the forecasts are more realistic in the short run, which will allow us to argue more precise goals in the development of our own geopolitics.
  Only after that is it possible to separate one's own geopolitical ambitions, priorities և actions in the long run, which is already a research problem.
And so, according to the Horizon-2025 international report [13, 14], the forecasts are more than pessimistic, as the negative trends in the region will remain viable for the next five years.
Experts single out the following issues in this context.
  The first is the deepening of the resource deficit. By 2025, the population of the interregion will exceed half a billion, which in turn will increase the anthropogenic burden on the natural environment.
  If we add to this the deepening of the current tendencies of climate change, it becomes obvious that the shortage of drinking water and land resources necessary for the survival of the population will intensify.
  It will lead to transformations of geopolitical processes.
is.
  According to forecasts, the next most important circumstance is the oil age.
  These trends will first affect the energy priorities of the graduate countries in the region, as the share of renewable energy resources will increase in line with global trends.
  And this will have a serious impact on the socio-economic indicators of the countries in the region.
  Serious shortages of financial resources will appear in the oil rich countries.
 In addition, as a result of the deepening trends observed today, there will be a change in the geography of oil exports in favor of East Asia and South Asia.
  The European currency will decline sharply, and the United States will gradually become the main competitor of oil-exporting countries, replacing Saudi Arabia with such priority realignments, which will dramatically change the world's geopolitical relations with the region and, consequently, its behavior.
in markets, the role.
  The explosiveness of the processes in the region of the international energy energy sector societies in the region's deepening in parallel with the increase in emissions.
  The reason for the latter is the deepening of socio-economic contradictions, as well as the "toughening" of individuals' close ethnic and religious identification.
  Moreover, these contradictions will be expressed not only between states, "religious groups" of peoples, but also within the latter.
  For example, 61% of the region's wealth resources are concentrated in the hands of 10% of the population.
 Until 2025, this loading is deepening.
  That is why not only the contradictions between the states will intensify, but also within them.
  The possibility of the second wave of the "Arab Spring" is considered realistic, which may already include the safe countries of the region, as, as mentioned above, oil and dollar revenues will decrease.
  It is noteworthy that experts see the possibility of controversy on social grounds in the neighboring country, Turkey.
In addition, along with the growth of economic inequality, the phenomena of deepening (identification) - ethnic, religious, social, etc. -
  Moreover, these tendencies were noticeable even during the first wave of the "Arab Spring" in Libya and Syria, where the conflicts between the main sub-ethnic units led to long-term civil wars.
  According to experts, the tendencies of "division", such as Turkey and Israel, which are separated by powerful state structures in Islam in 2025, can become victims of socio-political "fragmentation" of societies.
The authors of the report consider it more dangerous "they will continue politically in the coming years.
 Moreover, the word here does not refer to the opposition of Shiism-Sunism, but to the deepening of the contradiction between Turkey and Saudi Arabia in the Sunni world.
  In addition, in the future, the contradictions between the "moderate" and "extremist" aspects of Islam will intensify.
  According to him, the extremism of the actions will be observed not only in the political context of sub-ethnic or religious groups, but also in the political context of the states, especially the example of Turkey-Israel, where right-wing extremists will remain in power even after 5 years.
by the authorities.
  The next threat to the stability of this region, according to experts, will arise in 2025, when issues of hereditary hegemony will arise in the Persian Gulf countries - the replacement of the caretaker leader of Iran, in Egypt - in Al-Sisi.
According to experts, the problems of the transfer of political power will surely satisfy the coups d'etat, political-civil wars.
As a result of all this, the region will remain the most militarized zone of the Earth-Geopolitical structure, where local conflicts will regularly lead to military conflicts.
It is obvious that in this context there will be active rearrangements in the ambitions of the World Power Centers in the Priorities, which will be expressed through the active policies pursued by the latter.
For example, the most active foreign player in the region will continue to be the United States, whose geopolitical priority is more controllable in the region.
1 It is the creation of facts.
  The reason, in general, is the new US geopolitical ambitions in the region, which are being developed by the US and are already being implemented in the "Great Middle East" geopolitical program for the region in question, which is interpreted as a struggle against the "evil axis" of the Islamic world.
 Accordingly, through the process of "democratization" and "export of Western values", it will ensure the control of capital և energy sources.
  The change of American administrations in the East is part of the project.
  The United States has renounced the doctrine that has been practiced in this region for decades. that is, to support Muslim-authoritarian regimes in order to curb Islamist movements and their ambitions.
The reason is that the center of world power is clearly moving from the Euro-Atlantic region to the Pacific basin.
  Consequently, the economic rise of the East Asian powers will be followed by the emergence of a new force challenging the political leadership of the West.
  This force will be aimed at creating an anti-Western alliance, first of all with the religious-ideological enemy of the West, the Islamic East.
  Such geopolitical acceleration is also pointed out by S. In Huntington's theory.
Therefore, it is possible to neutralize the possible dangers through controllable chaos.
One of the military burdens of the Earth, China will continue to use "soft power" in the short term.
 It implies 1 The term "Greater Middle East" was coined by the United States: Ջ Ջ Bush. During the presidency.
  Accordingly, in the American geopolitical notions, the "Greater East" is presented as a super-region, which stretches to the North. The borders of the power centers from Africa to the East - India, China and Russia.
  The project became more relevant to the weakening of the ideological provisions of Monadlism և on Huntington's civilizations.
According to experts, if in 2001 The war in Afghanistan was aimed at building the eastern part of the Greater Middle East, and now it is the turn of the western parts of the south.
  The Arab revolutions of 2011 are mentioned as evidence.
  From Batsidran, a new wave of "satellite spring" is forecast.
 See details [5, pp. 242-250].
The basis of the "clash of the theory of capitalization".
  Opportunities in the most obvious պայմաններում conditions ներում in the developments expected after the crisis.
In the short term, Beijing will be able to temporarily neutralize its own problems. The key ambitions of the region are common aspirations with the Muslim world.
However, it should be noted here that in the long run, the Beijing-Ankara conflict is inevitable in order to influence the ethnic Turkish elements in China.
  An active conflict on the part of the United States, which may be due to the activation of pan-Turkish sentiments by Turkey.
In this context, a non-secondary role can be assigned to Azerbaijan.
From the situation of Islamic Xinjiang, it is possible that it will not have a "settlement", as Russia's ambitions and real actions in the region will be expressed in contradictory shades.
  In this way, the foreign main player will generally maintain its military positions and will be directly involved in the issues.
  However, in the geo-economic sphere, Moscow can make investments in the return of resources of an active actor in the near future.
  Consequently, contradictory nuances will be observed in his behavior, both in terms of relations with the regional states, as well as in terms of concrete military actions, although V. To ensure the continuity of Putin's rule, the Kremlin will try to create a background of an overactive player.
  The mentioned contradictions are already noticeable in the Turkey-Russia relations manifested in the context of the Syrian conflict.
The role of the European Union in the region will continue to decrease.
This is due to the lack of joint geopolitical ambitions and programs, as well as the growth of their own problems.
Experts have long predicted that Europe will find itself in another cycle of economic crisis in 2020. [13]
By a strange coincidence, it is already expressed by the "COVD19" epidemic.
  In addition, Europe has serious migration and security issues, due to which it will gain the status of a protected entity in the face of gradual regional developments.
Thus, our region enters a new stage of geopolitical processes.
  The geopolitical processes taking place in the Greater Middle East are gaining even more intensity. Therefore, no unit on the political map of the region can remain a part of these processes.
  In other words, each unit, civilized, political or ethnic, must clarify its own geopolitical ideas և try to bring them to life through Realpolitik.
content depth.
From the ideas, imposed by this logic, it is necessary to clarify the geopolitical ideas and priorities towards the region.
  It is obvious that the latter must come from the general content of the Armenian geopolitics, that is, from the general goal, priorities, subordination of the activities of the general sectors.
  Let us state that in the previous works we have already referred to the above-mentioned general problems [3, 4, 5 pages 316-320, 6, 8, 9].
  Therefore, in this case, only the approaches related to the region, which, in fact, complete the part of the present recommendations of this research.
  Moreover, the latter should be presented with a general package of goals, priorities, risk assessment, by balancing which the essence of pragmatic policy will be revealed.
 And so. Proof of purpose.
  Yerjan should strive for the status of a geopolitical "gateway" in the region, which presupposes an active subjective role in the consideration of all conflicting possibilities affecting his own geopolitical interests.
  The assertion of such a goal stems not only from our development in the region, but also from the lack of an alternative to existence in this case in general.
the necessary self-geopolitical ideas գործ the toolkit to bring them to life.
  Accordingly, we distinguish three dimensions: priorities, opportunities and risks.
To clarify the priorities: Armenia should play the role of a natural representative, a sponsor of the Christian world in the region.
  It presupposes the primary role of the developer and implementer of Christian ideas in the development of Christian interests during the settlement of conflicts.
  Today, there are more than 15 million Christians in the Middle East, belonging to about 28 Christian denominations [10, 15].
  It is obvious that the closest unity of the latter, the more empty is the place of the center of defense-power, the power of which is constantly aggravated due to the structures of different conflicts այս of Christian importance, in this context can play an active role ևreforming the most important (non-world)
time.
The Armenian Church, Exhibition • Armenia needs the position of international law on the elimination of the consequences of the Genocide.
  In this case, on a legal basis, the claims of intra-territorial material compensation must be defined as an integral part of the realization of international law, as an option that has no alternative to the elimination of the consequences of the genocide.
• Armenia should be actively involved in regional redistribution-redistribution processes, with the prospect of owning or owning a share of the full resources available.
  The drinking water factor has a special role here.
  The oil age is replaced by the "water age".
  The resource provided by Armenia is the most important tool for the realization of such ideas.
to become world-political.
This will exclude the regional issue. • Armenia, by its active role, should be able to develop the sad prospect of being on the geopolitical "altar" of developments from the different agendas of Artsakh, the experience of which has sadly become too much.
 The "Unification" process must be completed quickly, in addition to the "de facto" nature, there are also "de jure" bases with the Declaration of Independence of the Republic of Armenia.
  Thus, two important problems will be excluded. Possible process of nationalization due to its destructive nature, նարավոր Possibility of intervention of power centers.
  The solution of the issue on the military front gives us full authority և to approach the issue from a forceful angle.
Opportunities in the Armenian Diaspora in the Diaspora Opportunity A / Public component of the Armenian geopolitical potential.
Re-evaluation of significance.
  Powerful centers of the Armenian Diaspora are established here in 12 countries - about 800 thousand. Armenians in the presence of powerful pan-Armenian structures [7 pages 98-130].
The Armenian Diaspora has an influential economic, political and cultural role in almost all key countries of the region.
And in some countries, Lebanon, Iran, Armenians have an official participation in the political life of the country.
  Accordingly, the goal should be to transform the Armenian factor from a passive subject to an active one in regional and global geopolitical processes.
  As an example, we can bring Iran or Turkey, which respectively, through the ևTurkish-speaking elements of the Shiite communities, play an active role in almost all developments, almost always receiving their share.
We must get rid of the complex that, according to our compatriots in the Diaspora, we have captives and hostages in those countries.
 On the contrary, single-center network structures for a single purpose can be a powerful tool in any regional development scenario.
structures, taking on a powerful network - a natural component of the Armenian / Armenian geopolitical potential.
In this plane we consider two possible factors.
The first is the geopolitical demand of the territory of the Republic of Armenia, and the second is the geopolitical (especially regional) significance of fresh water.
 We have referred to both factors in detail before [5, 285-297], therefore, the volume limitations, we will only emphasize the essential circumstances of the latter.
  And so, while allowing the geographical position of the Republic of Armenia to claim the status of a communication node in the region.
  It is obvious that so far all the regional super-projects have bypassed us.
  Therefore, our priorities in this regard should be completely re-evaluated - to occupy a key position in all future projects by forcing Armenian factors.
 This particularly refers to the prospect of connecting Iran, South, East and South Asia via Iran (road, rail) and connecting the latter to the Black Sea basin and Russia.
Regarding the importance of fresh water, we must state that in the future it will become the main resource determining the content of geopolitical processes, the natural resource with which Armenia is considered relatively secure.
In general, the Armenian Highlands are divided by the Caspian Sea, the Caspian Sea and the Persian Gulf basins.
  The major rivers of Central Asia form here.
  The Republic of Armenia, occupying the small northern part of the highlands, with a large hydropower potential of mountain springs, can submit a serious application for the export of high-quality water resources, we have already presented the previous ones.
 Here we must take into account the fact that in the future a serious competition for both regional and global issues will start.
  Accordingly, Armenia may find itself under the active influence of geopolitical processes, the consequences of which may be very negative.
with water.
  The fact that Armenia's resource ownership, that is, the slowing down of the process, not only deprives it of a serious political and economic potential, but also reduces the possibility of independent use of the resource.
  Therefore, we consider it necessary to develop a subcategory of specific actions - their rapid implementation.
  First of all, it presupposes pointing out the effective options of storage and export of this natural resource.
Risks, especially in the region • Armenia և Armenian communities may become targets of Muslims.
  Of course, this is a very serious, extremist, Muslim extremist sentiment. There is an idea that the passivity of the Armenian factor in Armenia, often unnoticed, can neutralize the possibility of targeting Muslims.
  However, the sad memories of being genocide in one's own country and the Syrian and Iraqi communities force us to completely rethink our perceptions.
against the background of the formation of structures.
in Armenia.
The presence of the same Russia • contains serious risks for Russia's attempts at economic, political, cultural's military's non-subjectivity.
  However, it is "buried" in various geopolitical problems on different fronts, has serious economic problems, has "frozen hotspots" in its own territory in the conditions of economic sanctions imposed by the West, at least in the short term it can not hinder Armenia's attempts at independence.
Mostly in line with Russia's regional interests.
  Russia should have a serious, capable partner in geopolitical processes, in the person of Armenia, but never a world-political tool, as there should always be an alternative to the Moscow-Yerevan geopolitical axis. Washington-Yerevan, Brussels-Yerevan, Beijing-Yerevan Thanks to this factor, Tehran, Damascus and Beirut can join at any time.
• Armenia may be the target of migration flows in the region due to its position in the geography.
 Note that the existence of this risk can not be neutralized through complete passivity.
  On the contrary, Armenia should play an active role as a regional migration priority, with the obligation to choose to grant asylum only to Armenians.
  In the geographical future, we will willy-nilly find ourselves in the focus of the geographical movements of the population.
  The only alternative is a sharp increase in population density through the future Great Patriotic War.
  This, in turn, will limit the desires of Armenia as a migrant.
• The possibility of Azerbaijan's expansion.
 This risk has existed, has, and will always exist in the future, regardless of geopolitical perceptions or ambitions.
  Moreover, the only way to neutralize this risk is to fix and realize one's own geopolitical ambitions.
  From the Azerbaijani point of view, it will be expressed by the Kur-Araks natural border demarcation, where the key role is reserved for the Armenian Army, a possible (non-primary) actor realizing the geopolitical-Armenian ideas.
It is obvious that Armenia must also become a guarantor of the realization of the rights of the national minorities of Azerbaijan [12].
In the case of Turkey, in the case of Turkey, the main starting point for building relations should be the natural, international law of annihilation of the genocide after the genocide, with the expectation of territorial and material compensation, first of all, the revision of the 1921 Russian-Turkish treaty.
  It is obvious that the possibility of realizing short-term ambitions is small.
 However, it can become an irreplaceable geopolitical "tool", which opens a wide opportunity for pragmatic, profitable "deals", no matter how "immoral" it sounds from an irrational point of view.
  Moreover, in the world-political context of the use of this "tool", the monopoly is given to the Republic.
Thus, the only precondition not only for the development, but also for the real existence of the Republic of Armenia, on the basis of a strong statehood, is simply "doomed" to become a strong player in the Middle East "game board".
at the gate "in the near future" is geopolitical.
  That is, we are planets in the Near East, and so are the main games.
