Linguistic study of the world typology and classification on their structural commonalities and peculiarities.
  Typological classifications are made at the levels of sound (phonological և phonological typology), word (phonological typology) և sentence (syntactic typology).
Languages, based on modern linguistics, often distinguish between the super-syntactic level, the typology of text and grammar.
Since typological typologies have focused on the word, morphological typology is more developed and has more complete classifications.
  Nevertheless, as in his “Language. "Introduction to the study of speech" says Edward Sepir. "։ It is impossible to determine the limited number of types that will be justified by the peculiarities of the dialects of thousands of languages ​​spoken on the face of the earth."
  Unfortunately, we have an attempt to complete the modern knowledge about the typological classification of languages.
  In this article we will try to present the general direction of the historical development of the linguistic typology of languages, to show E. Sepiri's proposed power in the field of typological classification of languages, as well as some theories and approaches to it in the context of the meaning of conceptual typology.
In the first classifications of conceptual typology, the ideas of inclination and attachment were distinguished.
Friedrich Schlegel, addressing this issue for the first time, divided languages ​​into two groups: oblique և non-oblique.
  Being a German intellectual with a classical education, Schlegel considered inclined languages ​​to be "organic" and non-inclined languages ​​to be imperfect and "inorganic".
  Auguste Schlegel singled out "individual" languages, and for the Italians introduced the difference between comparative and analytical structures.
The meanings are expressed comparatively through various changes, and in the case of analytics through auxiliary words, word order և tone.
Grammatically perfect, in the case of structure, in the form of Jenbari. von Humboldt, moreover, he singled out the multilingual languages, which he considered a kind of attachment.
Subsequent researchers increased the number of types to get a more accurate picture.
  Among them, a significant 1 mm. - know we know in advance that it is impossible to set up a limited number of types thatE. Sapir, Language.
 An Introduction to the Study of Speech, NY, 1921, p. There are 59 classifications of Steinthal, Schleicher, Mistel, Fortunov.
Steintal based not only the word but also the sentence on the typology of languages.
  He is the author of the division of the sound "person" languages.
 He called languages ​​that did not have internal word changes unifying.
  Among such languages ​​were considered, for example, Indonesian languages, Chinese - Chinese.
  Steinhtal classified languages ​​that had an internal change of word.
  According to him, the change of personality takes place through repetitive suffixes, as well as through incarnation.
 In changing languages, the grammatical meaning is changed by adding elements, as, for example, in Egyptian.
Mistel developed Stantal's distinction between the vowel's և person և languages, just as he's distinguished between nonverbal, pseudo-verbal և true languages.
  Languages ​​were considered to be languages ​​in which there are no words with a known meaning. such are Egyptian, Bantu languages, etc. [4].
  In pseudo-verbal languages, words do not correspond to the description of the word.
  Such languages ​​are Ugrafinian, Turkic, Mongolian languages.
  True lexical languages, including Indo-European and Semitic languages, are distinguished by the presence of words.
Multi-compositional languages ​​were distinguished by Mistel as languages ​​և because in them the sentence and the word are a whole.
fully fully valued. Sepir in his "Language. Introduction to Speech Studies ”addresses almost all aspects of language, from its definition to phonetics to its structure and typology.
should express Sepir criticizes the notion that there are "voice" and "person" languages.
 He mentions that all the languages ​​of the world can have syntactic relations, even if there is not a single suffix in them.
There are no real person-languages, and whether it is possible to speak about "personality" in a literal sense, this remains a superficial understanding.
  By this he rejects the implication of the idea that there is an "inner self" insofar as it presupposes a dualistic division, accepting the possibility of an "inner personality."
  He notes that the division based on formal processes would be more natural.
Sepir does not abandon the notions of "analytical", "comparative", "multidimensional", but suggests using them not in an absolute way, but taking into account the language as a whole, considering it comprehensively.
Thus, the languages ​​in which the words are connected not due to word change, but due to the sequence of words վերլուծ are called analytical.
 In such languages, the concepts kamçen are combined into one word in general, as in Chinese, or they use it very little, as in French.
In compound languages, on the contrary, changes in the word change the grammatical meaning և link the words together.
 Such as, for example, Latin and Arabic.
  Multilingual languages, as E. Sepir is formulated, even more comparatively [in the same place].
  They are as much related to compound languages ​​as compound languages ​​are related to analytical English.
  Based on all these considerations, E. Sepir creates a new system of morphological typology, which is able to unite the different principles of the previous typologies, to show the nuances that have not been convincingly coordinated with these absolute divisions.
E. The method of linguistic classification proposed by Sepir is called conceptual classification.
  This classification is based on three criteria: a) the types of concepts expressed, b) the technique of expression of relations, c) the degree of synthesis in grammar.
 [4] Thus, in terms of the expression of concepts, Sepir distinguishes four types of languages: • Simple pure-relational languages ​​• Complex pure-relational languages ​​• Simple mixed-relational languages ​​• Complex mixed-relational languages. The basic concepts are expressed in separate words.
  In complex pure-relational languages, on the contrary, grammatical changes are made through internal changes in the word particle։.
  In simple mixed-relational languages, syntactic relations are expressed in terms of the necessary connection between concepts which are not entirely devoid of meaning, but which cannot change the meaning of their radical elements by means of particles or internal changes.
  The most well-known oblique languages ​​are complex mixed-relational languages, such as a large number of adjoining languages, some compound, some multi-compound languages.
In terms of relationship expression techniques, all linguistic means are grouped into four main categories: disconnection, attachment, fusion (bending) / bending և Symbolization.
 Each of the four types distinguished from the point of view of the expression of concepts is divided into three main groups: oblique, adjoining and symbolic.
 In the case of simple purely relational languages, the separatist group is differentiated.
Finally, in terms of the degree of synthesis in grammar, analytical, compound languages ​​are multidimensional types.
It should be noted that in this system not only these main groups are taken into account, but also their variants. A bilingual, for example, can be both oblique and symbolic, being more oblique.
CA) and synthesis (moderate) dasakantibeterenhamadrakan (chapavorbazmahamadrakan) siutekakanhamadrakansalinankhorhrdanshayinktsakanverlutsakanhamadrakanverlutsakan (chapavorhamadrakan) silluk (VerinNeghos) bantufranserentekakanktsakan (symbolic flavor) bazmahamadrakannutkatekakanktsakanbazmahamadrakan (moderate) chinuktekakanbazmahamadrakanalgonkintekakanverlutsakananglerenParzkharerelyatsionBardkharerelyatsiontekakan (symbolic flavor) inflexional (khistkhorhrdanshayin) Khorhrdanshayintekakanhamadrakanlatineren, Greek, sanskrithamadrakantakelmahamadrakanaraberen, yebrayerenTSANOTUTYUN. The disconnection line means that the process is poorly developed.
It should be noted that a, b, c, d respectively show the processes of separation, attachment, fusion / inclination և symbolization.
  When more than one device is available, they are sorted according to their level of efficiency.
Columns II, III, IV refer to the following conceptual groups: II - derivative, for example, minimal forms III - mixed / concrete rational, for example, number agreement IV - purely relational, for example, subordinate designation of semantic typology, representing Sepir as a series of languages. It is necessary to point out points of intersection of grammatical features that have not been observed in the past in the best case of linguists, have not received due attention from, or have received.
  However, this classification is free from restrictions.
  Sepir himself admits this, noting that in the case of some languages ​​it is difficult to draw the line between types, just as he rightly notes that languages ​​are complex historical structures, so, unfortunately, any attempt to classify them is not doomed to error, at least at every step.
E. The conceptual typology of Sepir is the most advanced և complete classification of its time.
  Then the scientists who came greatly influenced him.
  In this context, J. can be especially mentioned. Greenberg, whose theory is based on Sepir's conceptual typology.
  Greenberg typology is called quantitative typology, the expression of which was found in the scientist's "Quantitative linguistic classification of quantitative approaches".
In contrast to E. Sepir: J. Greenberg sets five criteria in the basis of his classification; he gives a series consisting of one or more indexes, which determines the place of languages ​​in relation to each of those criteria.
  This method, of course, is more accurate, because when dealing with quantitative calculations, it can show the place of languages ​​more accurately.
 [7] Like Noam Chomsky, Greenberg փորձում tried to find the universal structures on which human language is based, but unlike Chomsky, who was guided by the formalist method, Greenberg was methodically functionalist.
Greenberg formulated the idea of ​​implication universals, which is still central to the determination of linguistic commonalities.
Drawing on Sepir's approaches, Greenberg also studies and presents phonetic commonalities from a simultaneous point of view, as a theoretical basis for contemporaneous concepts of universes.
It should be noted that other models are proposed, which are mainly based on the criticism that the above classifications do not show all the complex intersections between grammatical categories that exist in a language.
    Thus, Jennifer Garland cites the example of the Esinhala language, showing that whether its derivatives, clitics, and suffixes should, according to the traditional perception, be taken as a case of attachment, they are too close to the root, but the classification of that language as italics is very wrong.
 [3] Advocates of the theory of evolutionary languages ​​believe that languages ​​are usually analytical, again skewed.
 R. Մ. V. Dixon likens this process to clockwise, noting that, for example, Old Chinese would be approximately 3 o'clock.
At 00, they are from sloping to analytical, that is, it would be mostly analytical with some sloping elements.
According to Dixon, Egyptian, a language with a written history of millennia, has passed through the whole period.
 Similar theories were proposed later.
  Thus, Ellie van Gelderen presents the patterns of language change as a cycle.
  An example of this is grammaticalization.
This is the phenomenon when word units turn into American numerals, and later new linguistic units come to replace them.
 Carlton Hodge suggests the following cycle in the development of the Egyptian language. Afrasian Pre-Linguistic-Analytical Ancient Egyptian-Comparative Late Egyptian-Analytical Coptic-Comparative [8] Nevertheless, Spiritipology was of revolutionary significance, with further classifications and derived theoretical conceptions approaching the system.
It can be said that whether the further theories have been supplemented and clarified, whether they have referred to or misinterpreted patterns of wrong classifications of some languages, Sepir's proposed classification remains fundamentally correct, and his "Language" is a capital work of grammatical typology.
  Sepir bases classification on grammatical relations, examining them from three different angles, distinguishing groups through which to create a structure in which languages ​​are not classified directly on the basis of this or that feature, but by combining those groups and types: the process of linguistic typology, expanding its possibilities.
Sepir, moreover, is able not only to linguistically substantiate its classification, but also to philosophically criticize the approaches of its predecessors, to reflect on the psychological aspects of grammar, paving the way for an entire field.
Languages: Some Sepir accurately classifies the many nuances of genital mutilation in a number of contexts.
  All this allows us to directly change the semantic typology of Sepir in detail, which is rightly considered one of the most grounded and important words in the field.
A look at the history of the typological classification of languages ​​in modern research not only provides an opportunity to systematically present the issues related to the classification of languages, but also shows the potential of the conceptual typology in it.
  The system proposed by Sepir serves as a basis for observations in this field.
  Ջ. Today, Greenberg's classification is, by far, the most fundamental typological evaluation of Time from a distance.
He sees the conceptual typology and its influence in the typological classification of modern languages.
  R. Մ. V. Dixon, J. Garland և's other systems are, in fact, built on a comprehensive Sepirian approach.
  Their application in the study of the Armenian language can give us a completely new, thorough knowledge of the history and structure of the language.
  The difficulties or impossibility of classification in terms of conceptual typology, but it can be said that there is no grounded, systematic critique of this approach today.
