Preface.
  It is difficult to imagine the fight against juvenile delinquency without a comprehensive and comprehensive settlement of the crimes attributed to them.
  To this end, much attention has recently been paid to juvenile justice, as well as various legislative initiatives related to the rights and legal interests of minors.
 This is evidenced in the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Armenia in the "Institutional Republic of the Law (Children) Recently Established 3.
  The purpose of the council is to promote the council of justice. ”1
related to the continuous improvement of the establishment of the Armenian juvenile system (legal, psychological, social, ethical, etc.), ensuring the protection of the legitimate interests of children's rights.
  The establishment of this structure was based on a number of international commitments undertaken by the Republic of Armenia, such as the OSCE on the Rights of the Child and Juvenile Justice in the Republic of Armenia [1].
The assessment of monitoring the procedure for termination of criminal prosecution or termination of a criminal case against juveniles in the Republic of Armenia in accordance with international standards is essential for the localization of the goals of juvenile justice.
  The system of state coercive measures և mechanisms applied to juvenile delinquents enshrined in a number of international instruments, which should be ensured by humanitarianism, the protection of the rights of minors և legal interests, their well-being, as well as guarantee the proportionate effect of state funds on juveniles.
The special procedure for juvenile delinquency is based primarily on the age, social and psychological characteristics of juveniles, which are required by the criminal procedure legislation of the Republic of Armenia.
  It is obvious that this is a consequence of the fact that the legislator is aware of the age peculiarities of minors - the need for additional guarantees of the rights and freedoms of minors.
guarantees.
13 The Juvenile Justice Council carries out its activities under the guidance of the RA Minister of Justice in 2018. By the procedure approved by the order N 188-A of May 11 երով by other legal acts.
Article 40 3 3 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child provides that States Parties shall endeavor to facilitate the establishment of laws, procedures, bodies, and institutions for children accused or in breach of criminal law, in particular (b) if necessary, without taking action against such children. to apply for a trial, subject to the observance of legal guarantees for the full protection of human rights.
It is particularly applicable. It follows that the Republic of Armenia, in the person of the competent authorities, must take the utmost account of the effective protection of the rights of juveniles being prosecuted.
  As it is mentioned, the establishment of these institutions, if desired, should be of a judicial nature, as it speaks of "applying for a trial without conducting".
However, that extrajudicial body must have full guarantees of full protection of human rights.
According to Article 5.1 of the Beijing Rules, the juvenile justice system is primarily aimed at ensuring the welfare of the juvenile, so that any measure affecting the juvenile offender is always commensurate with both the individual characteristics of the offender and the circumstances of the offense.
  The main purpose of the mentioned rule is explained separately in the "Commentary" section of the paragraph.
  Rule 5, in fact, envisages the application of just liability measures for any specific minor offense.
  The diversity of the interrelated aspects of this rule may contribute to the application of ambiguities, namely, that new, progressive responses are as desirable as precautions for the unjustified extension of juveniles.
Pursuant to Section 2.3 of Section 1 of the Tokyo Rules of Crime and Social Welfare, [3] To apply the period from the pre-trial stage to the verdict.
The international legal community is guided by the principle that juvenile offenders should not be discriminated against because of their age, their psychophysiological characteristics, or because their with.
  This presupposes abandoning the formal criminal procedure, using informal alternatives instead.
  This allows for adversarial proceedings to be found to establish guilt but, at the same time, maximally protects the rights and legitimate interests of minors.
  Measures and mechanisms should be envisaged here, which, being free from court proceedings, nevertheless provide a reasonable opportunity to find out the issue of the juvenile's guilt.
This institute allows to avoid stigmatization [5].
This process is strengthened in the psychology of the juvenile, he naturally feels rejected by the society.
  This, of course, did not preclude the appointment or release of the person from criminal liability.
RA Criminal Code 2:
4 According to Article 91 1 1, a juvenile who has committed a minor or moderate crime for the first time may be released from criminal liability by a court if the court finds that it can be remedied by means of coercive measures of an educational nature.
4 Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia, adopted by the RA National Assembly on 18.04.2003, entered into force on 01.08.2003, in force.
 HO-528-N, ARPA 2003.05.02 / 25 (260), Art. 407.
3 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code
5 (hereinafter referred to as the Code) Article 443, the court, when passing a verdict, comes to the conclusion that a juvenile can be corrected without imposing criminal sanctions, can release the juvenile from punishment to apply coercive measures of educational nature.
According to Article 443 of the Code, a court may release a juvenile from punishment կիրառ apply a coercive measure of an educational nature to him / her.
 However, part 1 of Article 91 allows the court to release a juvenile from criminal liability by applying coercive measures of a disciplinary nature against him.
  In that case, when the court releases the juvenile only from punishment, not from criminal liability, he / she may be placed in a special educational medical-educational institution, which is clear from the first part of Article 93 of the RA Criminal Code.
  We think there is uncertainty here. The problem that criminal procedure norms must ensure the implementation of criminal law norms is not provided here.
  Therefore, we consider that Article 443 of the Code should be reworded as follows: "Upon reaching a verdict, the court shall conclude that the juvenile may be remedied without the imposition of criminal sanctions.
Article 35 of the Code sets out circumstances, the existence of which precludes criminal proceedings և criminal prosecution.
  According to the content of the mentioned article, the grounds in the worm are classified into two groups: "justifying" (rehabilitation) grounds, which are provided for in points 1-3, part 1 of Article 35, part 2, "non-justifying" (no). Rehabilitation) 5 Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia, adopted by the National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia on 01.07.1998, entered into force on 12.01.1999, in force.
 HO-248, ARPA 1998.09.21 / 22 (55).
grounds provided for in Article 35 1 1 (4) to (13).
This is evidenced by Part 5 of Article 261 of the Code, according to which, when terminating the proceedings in the presence of circumstances under paragraphs 1-3 of Article 35 of this Code and terminating the criminal prosecution, it is not allowed to make statements that will cast doubt on the , against whom the criminal prosecution was terminated.
In other words, in case of termination of the criminal case, termination of the criminal prosecution, the person acquires a justified status, enjoys the rights related to him / her, envisaged by Article 35, points 1-3, part 2 of the Code.
 Termination of the proceedings on these grounds does not impose any obligation on the person or cause any negative consequences.
In the case of all other grounds, negative consequences may occur for the person in the future.
According to Article 35, Part 1, Clause 9 of the Code, no criminal case can be initiated, no criminal prosecution can be instituted, and the initiated criminal case is subject to termination if the person has not reached the legal age for criminal liability at the time of committing the act.
This point, as already mentioned, is considered unjustifiable; it is not included in the content of point 2 of part 1.
  This opinion was expressed by the RA Court of Cassation as a result of Hayarpi Atoyan's appeal.
  The Court of Cassation noted. "Clause 9 of Part 1 of Article 35 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code is included in the list of" non-justifying "grounds for termination of criminal proceedings and termination of criminal prosecution.
  In case of termination of the proceedings on such grounds, it is proved that the person's act contains features of a crime, but in the presence of the conditions defined by law, the investigative bodies release him from criminal responsibility.
The Court of Cassation finds that the separation of the basis envisaged by Article 35, Part 1, Clause 9 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code from the grounds provided for in Article 35, Part 1, Clause 2 of the RA Article implies that due to lack of corpus delicti (Article 35 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code). Part 2, point 2) the criminal case should be terminated, քրեական the criminal prosecution against the person should be terminated if the element or elements of the crime are missing in the prosecution.
  An exception to this rule is the case when the absence of corpus delicti is conditioned exclusively by the person who committed the crime, not having reached the age of criminal responsibility.
  In the latter case, the criminal proceedings must be terminated և The criminal prosecution of the person must be terminated on the basis of Article 35, Part 1, Clause 9 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, without citing Article 35, Part 1, Clause 2.
  In other words, if at the time of the commission of the crime the person has not reached the age of criminal responsibility provided by the RA Criminal Code, and all other elements of the crime are present, the criminal prosecution against the child must be terminated according to Article 35, Part 1, Article 9 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code. on the basis of point 2 of part 1 of the same article. "[7]
  Crime is a combination of four elements: the object of the crime, the objective side of the crime, the subject of the crime, the subjective side of the crime [11, p. 104].
  Unity is a whole, the absence of even one of the elements that make up this whole speaks of the absence of crime.
  The necessity of defining the age of criminal responsibility is connected with the individual's understanding of his / her behavior and social significance, his / her desires և aspirations to comply with public demands, to comply with the rules of conduct և to comprehensively understand the meaning of criminal responsibility.
 The legislature, by setting the age for criminal liability, was guided by a psychological criterion.
Conclusion.
The above allows us to conclude that the envisage of juvenile delinquency as a non-justifiable ground for termination of a criminal case does not follow from the declarative provisions of international humanitarianism, juvenile welfare, the use of proportionate measures, a number of other important principles.
  Fixed in the documents of such minors, defining how to guarantee minors.
  The legislator, the regulation does not ensure the age of the legal responsibility of those persons իրավունք legal interests, took into account the level of mental development of the minor, the circumstance of being accountable for what he has done, the psycho-physiological features.
  All this suggests that the dictatorship, on the one hand, absolved them of criminal responsibility, given their low level of perception, and, on the other hand, forgetting about those circumstances, caused negative consequences for them, as if removing that basis from the elements of crime.
Based on the above, we find that Article 35 1 1 9 9 should be removed from the list of non-justifying grounds for excluding criminal prosecution in a criminal case և to include these cases in the content of Article 1 1 2 նույն 2 of the same article.
The article was presented at the Student Conference of 29.09.2020.
