Preface.
  Minor impact on juvenile delinquency.
  This is due to the fact that adolescents, being at a vulnerable age, quickly integrate into the "community" with elements of criminal subculture.
As a result, the illegal behavior in it is reinforced by physical stimulants, which in the future, by correcting this behavior and bringing it to the level of professionalism, give birth to new publicly dangerous actions, which has its place in crime.
This is why the elaboration, coordination and development of legislation on minors is always on the agenda.
and conditioned almost before referring to the RA Criminal Procedure Code1
(hereinafter referred to as the Code) to the peculiarities of juvenile participation in investigative actions, to consider the question of what is meant by juvenile in the procedural sense.
  In this regard, we think that the opinion expressed in the legal literature is acceptable, according to which "Chapter 50 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code is dedicated to the regulation of the peculiarities of the case on juveniles, but both in the provisions of that chapter and in the Code the notion of" juvenile "is absent.
  And the criterion for applying this proceeding is considered to be a crime committed before the age of 18 (Article 439, part 1), ie the criterion for applying the procedure of the proceedings is substantive, not procedural ”[1].
The investigation is aimed at obtaining the system of investigative action carried out by the body conducting the proceedings in accordance with the procedure established by the criminal procedure legislation at the stage of post-judicial investigation, search and cognitive actions and evidence [2].
  In other words, the investigative actions, as in the whole criminal trial, as well as in its separate proceedings (including those concerning a juvenile), are a system of actions of evidence.
  It follows that the investigative actions are the basis of the evidentiary activity.
The peculiarities of the juvenile's participation in the investigative actions refer to the procedure for summoning the juvenile to the investigative action, the circle of persons who may participate in the investigative action involving the juvenile, the interrogation procedure, as well as the mandatory participation of the defense counsel.
  It should be noted that 2 RA Criminal Procedure Codes addressed to the Code, adopted by the RA National Assembly on July 1, 1998, entered into force on January 12, 1999, are in force.
  HO-248, ARPA 1998.09.21 / 22 (55).
defines only the peculiarities of the juvenile's participation in the interrogation.
  There is no separate article in the Code, which is dedicated to the procedural peculiarities of juvenile participation in investigative actions.
In order to solve this problem, it is necessary to mention the legal regulation of Article 212 of the Draft, which tried to fix as much as possible the general provisions that can be extended to a juvenile participating in an investigative action.
 According to the first part of this article, a person qualified as a psychologist (psychologist) is involved in the investigation with the participation of a minor or a disabled person.
  The legal representative of a minor or incapacitated victim or witness has the right to participate in the investigation.
It is clear from the first part of the above-mentioned article that the Draft has made significant progress compared to the relevant norms of the Code.
  This is evidenced by the fact that a psychologist is involved in all investigative activities under the draft in case of a minor.
  It should be noted that the Code provides for a separate regulation for the witness of only a minor victim, stating that their interrogation is carried out with the participation of a pedagogue.
However, this applies to a juvenile victim or witness under the age of 16 (Article 207 20 2 of the Code).
Let us now turn to the differences between the above provisions.
First, the Code does not provide for the peculiarities of the juvenile's participation in investigative actions, it refers only to the interrogation.
  In addition, the restrictive provisions of the Code apply only to minors or victims.
  Here a question arises. And in cases when the juvenile suspect or the accused or the convict is interrogated, is it not necessary to involve a pedagogue in that case as well? [4]
  After all, the essence of engaging a pedagogue is for the interrogator to work out the tactics of interrogation as much as possible, which will have a less negative psychological impact on the juvenile.
It is also noteworthy that all this refers to a victim or witness under 16 years of age, while the above-mentioned article of the draft does not differentiate between minors under 16 և16-18 years old, but refers to a minor.
The next consideration is the effectiveness of the pedagogue or psychologist.
 It is true that a pedagogue takes courses in psychology, but it is almost impossible to come across a situation in which he is more prepared or has higher professionalism than a psychologist who has the peculiarities of child psychology.
 In this regard, we think that the participation of a psychologist is preferable, rather than a thematic educator, which is stipulated in the Project.
Other participation of the juvenile in the investigation is ensured through his / her legal representative (Part 4 of Article 205 of the Code).
  Regarding the summoning through the legal representative of the court literature, the opinion was expressed that it is expedient in the case when the parents of the juvenile are characterized as positive, that is, refraining from behaving illegally.
 In case the parents are described as negative, the body conducting the proceedings should [5].
  Such an opportunity is provided to the body conducting the proceedings by Part 4 of Article 205 of the Code, according to which undeclared minors are usually summoned through their legal representatives.
  The term "rule" here suggests that possible cases where a minor is summoned by other persons, such as the administration of the place of study or the management of another institution at the discretion of the investigator, or other persons who can properly ensure the minor's presence.
  The legal representative of a minor victim or witness has the right to participate in the interrogation.
  It means that the investigator has no obligation to involve the legal representative, but in all cases when he wishes to be involved, the investigator is obliged to ensure his presence.
Of course, the mentioned again does not refer to the juvenile suspect or the accused, which in our opinion is omitted.
  We have already mentioned that the legal representative of the juvenile has the right to be interrogated, as well as the pedagogue.
  Although the Code of Investigation does not explicitly mention ombudsman's compulsory participation, but rather the right of the suspect or accused, its obligation is emphasized in Article 69 1 1 5 5 of the Code, which requires criminal participation when a suspect commits a crime. The accused is a minor.
  By virtue of this provision, the body conducting the proceedings is obliged to carry out any investigative action against the juvenile with the participation of a lawyer.
Moreover, if the juvenile refuses the defense counsel, he / she has the right not to accept the refusal of the juvenile suspect or the accused to refuse the defense counsel (Part 2 of Article 72 of the Code).
The Code ի Draft Regulations on Juvenile Detention Interrogation in the Proceedings of the Proceedings do not differ.
  Both in the Code and in the Draft, the interrogation could not last more than 4 hours in a row, and the interrogation of a minor, such as a person with a mental disorder or a serious illness, could not last more than 2 hours.
 The interrogation is allowed to continue after giving the interrogated person at least 1 hour break necessary for rest.
  The total length of the interrogation per day may not exceed 8 hours, and for a minor, as well as for a person suffering from a mental disorder or serious illness, 6 hours.
  There is no difference here.
  In our opinion, these regulations should be applied to the confrontation, as it is a kind of interrogation.
  In order to solve this problem, Part 2 of Article 224 of the Draft stipulates that the confrontation shall be conducted in accordance with the procedure established by this Code, taking into account the peculiarities defined by this Article.
It follows that when carrying out the mentioned investigative action against the juvenile, the body conducting the proceedings is obliged to observe the deadlines set for the juvenile interrogation.
Prior to the commencement of the interrogation, the prosecuting authority shall explain to the witness or victim under the age of sixteen the obligation to tell the truth about everything in the case, but he / she shall not be warned of his or her statutory responsibility for refusing to testify or giving obvious evidence.
  This provision is also enshrined in the Draft, but applies to minors, regardless of legal status, which, in our view, is a more comprehensive regulation (Article 212 3 3) of the Draft.
  However, one regulation has been added, which refers to the juvenile accused.
  Pursuant to Article 415 2 2 of the draft, an accused under the age of sixteen expresses a wish to testify, then the body conducting the proceedings informs him of the obligation to testify correctly, but does not warn him of the legal obligation to give false testimony.
Conclusion.
The Code defines the peculiarities of all juvenile investigative participation only in the interrogation.
  There is no separate article in the Code that deals with the characteristics of underage participation in activities.
The draft sets out general norms, by virtue of which, for example, the psychologist is obligated to participate with the participation of minors, and according to the Code, only a pedagogue participates in the juvenile interrogation, the effectiveness of which is less than that of the psychologist.
  The Code refers to the interrogation of a minor under the age of 16, and the Draft mentions a minor, which is a more comprehensive concept.
  The same procedure of interrogation according to the draft is applied in case of confrontation. This is evidenced by Part 2 of Article 224 of the Draft, which stipulates that the confrontation is carried out in accordance with the procedure defined by this Code, taking into account the actions and investigative features defined by this Article.
  It follows that when carrying out the above-mentioned action with juvenile delinquency, the body conducting the proceedings is obliged to comply with the deadlines set for the juvenile's interrogation, which is not regulated by the Code.
The article was presented at the Student Conference of 29.09.2020.
