Today's student, constantly connected to information technologies in everyday life, has very little contact with them in the learning process, as if he is in an environment alienated from his real world [1, 2, 3].
The active use of information technologies in the teaching process contributes to the increase of teaching efficiency [4, 5, 6].
 Experience with state-of-the-art information technology has shown that the use of teaching in the teaching process contributes to a sharp increase in interest [5].
The development of information technology and mass 11 և 12's access to the material being studied by students now allow new approaches to the subject of "physics" to be developed in the classroom, allowing to alleviate traditional difficulties դարձ to make the course accessible, attractive and visual.
 At present, there are numerous works that present both problem-solving and problem-solving activities [7, 8, 9, 10], in which information technologies are used, which are dedicated to the teaching of physics using modern information technologies in physics, in which materials are presented or illustrated. Some physics problems developed by Power Point [9, 10, 12], where interdisciplinary connections are identified.
 Sometimes tasks where the tasks are met are discussed and presented with the help of complex computer programs [11, 12, 13].
The above-mentioned works provide a visual representation of factual knowledge and information, but can not present the dynamics of the process in question, as it requires deep computer knowledge, which is a serious obstacle from the point of view of mass application.
 In addition, in such cases, the main focus and effort of the executor is on programming issues, է the essence of the problem remains in the shadows.
At present, the implementation of the vital imperatives dictated by the imperative of the time is practically impossible without getting acquainted with the generalities of the research methods of different subjects երին interdisciplinary connections.
In the presented topic, a complex teaching method is offered for the complex process of solving the problem-solving process through simple computer programs, where the teaching methods - theoretical material, exercises, quizzes, computer tests - are presented interconnected, in a certain order.
Multimedia media weights հնարավորություն The presented material is an opportunity for any acquaintance (be it a teacher or a student) to creatively improve the studied topic without the knowledge of computer-specific languages.
The main goals of the presented work are: • to increase the efficiency and quality of the learning process, • to create opportunities for programming, to develop this topic, to create languages ​​without computer skills • to create interdisciplinary connections, to make the course more complete and purposeful.
  That is why it is suggested to develop tasks ման problem-solving approaches, which will show the connections of physics իաներիinformation technologies, mathematics և physics, physics.
Animated representations of solutions within the framework of the subject "Physics" of the tasks ագայում in the future it will be possible to apply it մյուս for other mathematical subjects, ensuring teaching-coordination.
Do not limit yourself to interconnection between the methods of drawing. development, solution ումների solution analysis - prepare a multimedia presentation of the theoretical material with Microsoft Office Power Point և / or iSpring Suite programs, which are compiled for the above sections 4; 6; 20; 9 և 12 parts, each part lasts 15 minutes, - prepare a multimedia presentation showing the dynamics of problem solving with animations by MicrosoftOffice Power Point program, which are compiled for the above sections 5; 7; 24; 10 և 14 parts, each part lasts 10 minutes - prepare quizzes with Microsoft Office Power Point և / or iSpring Suite programs, which are composed for the above sections 1; 2; 7; From 3 և 4 parts, each part lasts 20 minutes, - prepare computer tests with iSpring Suite program, which are composed for the above-mentioned sections, respectively 8; 12; 40; 18 և 10 tests, in which each test consists of 20 questions. 10 minutes for each section - prepare quizzes with Microsoft Office Power Point և / or iSpring Suite software, which are compiled for the above sections 1; 2; 7; From 3 և 4 parts, each part lasts 20 minutes, - prepare computer tests with iSpring Suite program, which are composed for the above-mentioned sections, respectively 8; 12; 40; 18 և 10 tests, in which each test consists of 20 questions. 10 minutes for each section - prepare quizzes with Microsoft Office Power Point և / or iSpring Suite software, which are compiled for the above sections 1; 2; 7; From 3 և 4 parts, each part lasts 20 minutes, - prepare computer tests with iSpring Suite program, which are composed for the above-mentioned sections, respectively 8; 12; 40; 18 և 10 tests, in which each test consists of 20 questions. which for the above sections are composed respectively 8; 12; 40; 18 և 10 tests, in which each test consists of 20 questions. which for the above sections are composed respectively 8; 12; 40; 18 և 10 tests, in which each test consists of 20 questions.
11 արան In 12th grade, in order to prepare multimedia demonstrations in physics, it is more expedient to pay attention to the following basic requirements:  the presentation should complement the teacher's speech, not a duplicate,  the materials presented should be concise և they should contain the basic provisions of the study. պահ Maintaining a homogeneous style (using no more than 3 գուն same color shades և fonts),  Unique և Effective tricks, solutions Develop specific actions to impress learners, impress հաշվ Calculate accurately the display time, ճիշտ Save the correct material in the provided material. The presented material should not be overloaded with effects that do not relate to the topic, because և the students' attention is focused on those effects, deviating from the main topic,  ​​the changes ումը the creation of a new presentation based on them should be made as simple as possible; with links to well-known works, examples.involving examples.involving examples.
Բավականին Enough time is saved, which is an opportunity to evaluate all the students during each lesson, as well as to help this or that student when needed.
։ The teacher has the opportunity to take into account the time period during which this or that student arrives at the correct answer.
Վտանգ The risk of subjective approach is excluded during testing.
Լայն A wide range of knowledge assessments can be used.
։ Ability to test randomly selected tasks.
It is desirable to combine the above-mentioned method of teaching with modern information technologies with both traditional and online teaching method. that is, we will have a combination of hybrid methods.
Teaching: Traditional-Innovative: Multimedia presentations on the subject of "Physics" in 11 և 12th grades, quizzes համալ complex in the educational process, in case of application in a certain sequence, will have the following advantages: They are more easily integrated into the learning process than in the case of traditional teaching.  The material is better understood;  Develops the learner's creative, analytical thinking, promotes the ability to find solutions to difficult situations;  Promotes learning interactivity; հնարավորություն Enables the learner to deepen the material.։ Enables the learner to combine knowledge and skills;։ The structure of multimedia performances develops systematic, analytical thinking;  Develops the ability to work with information;  Develops interdisciplinary connections.
training, where training methods.
