Hovhannes Kozern is very important in the history of Armenian calendar.
  The latter J.-J. դդ. He is a famous vardapet, whose birth and death dates are not known.
  Despite his great reputation, very little biographical information is known about him with the interesting and interesting nickname "Kozern".
 And before presenting the sources in which the name of the famous vardapet is mentioned, let us mention the explanations.
  Thus, the meaning of the nickname "Kozern" H. It remains incomprehensible for Kyurtyan, and according to Hrachya Acharyan "Radical Dictionary of Armenian", it means "child, child".
  And Jond Alishan in his work "Hayapatum" explains the nickname "Kozern" "camel cub".
We find a similar explanation of the word in the աբ Old Dictionary և E. In "Modern Armenian Explanatory Dictionary" compiled by Aghayan.
There are references to the historian Aristakes Lastivertsi (11th century) "History", Matteos Urhayetsi (11th -
12 centuries) և In the works of Samuel Anetsi (12th century) "Chronology", in the collection "Yearbook" of Smbat Sparapet (13th century).
Aristakesa) Meeting the first mention of Hovhannes Kozern in the work "History", where we read in particular: "And John wrote a letter of faith in the same province, which was called Kozern above."
The following references to the Rev. Lastivertsu are in the "Chronology".
  And the references to Matthew Urhayets are made not on one occasion, but on several occasions.
b) The first mention of Kozern by Matthew Urhayetsi is connected with the writing of "The Interpretation of Tsrazatk" at the request of the Byzantine emperor Barsegh (Vasil).
  According to the mentioned work, the Armenian 455, that is, 1006-1007, K. There was a commotion in Constantinople because the Greeks confused Easter and did not celebrate Easter.
 The Greek monks fraudulently accepted Irion's inaccurate և calendar calendar, postponing it to Easter 8 days earlier, on the day of Tsaghkazard.
  Emperor Vasil, not being satisfied with the answers given by the Greek sages, wanted to know the words of the Armenian monks, about whom he had heard a lot before.
  He knew Hovsep Ddtsayetsi by name, as he knew Hovhannes Kozern.
 The emperor asks John to send him to Constantinople, but they refuse to go.
  Instead, Kozern wrote "Explanation of Tsrazatk" and sent it to the emperor.
  Here, the priest, based on the Ananias Shirak commentaries, which he made in his "Easter speech", substantiates the orthodox position of the Armenian Church, rejecting Irion's Easter list.
  Anania Shirakatsi, speaking to Irionimas, criticizes him, because he considers the first year of the 19th lunar year to be the year of the completion of April 6 = Nisan 16, which was the 18th year of the 19-year period.
  It turns April 6 into April 5, the year when April 5 corresponds to Saturday, and Sunday, April 6, is Easter.
  And in those years the miraculous Resurrection of Christ coincided with the Passover of the Jews, which was forbidden in the first cosmos.
 In his 532nd year, we meet such Easter 4 times, the first 3 every 95 years, and the last 247 years after that, in 1007, which is why Hovhannes Kozern writes to Tskysar and sends his "Explanation of Tsrazatk" to the emperor.
  Prof. R. Vardanyan substantiates that in 1007 Kozern wrote his work "Commentary on the Calendar", a part of which, under his name, is in the CU No. 1999,, this "Explanation of Tsrazatk" was part of that commentary, which is mentioned by Matteos Urhayetsi, which has not reached us.
    In other words, the scholar states that the calendar collection written by Kozern, known as the "Commentary on the Calendar", contained not only the original in the CU number 1999, which was copied more than 100 years later, but also his "Copy" by Tsrazatk. The letter-comment written about.
  And in the "Commentary Book", which was published in 1126. It is an example, the rules of the ancient "Copy Calendar" have been preserved, that is, the months of astronomy, the seasons of the seasons of the year of the Armenian real estate, the constants, the method of finding them through retreat.
c) Other information about Hovhannes Kozern refers to 1021/1022. Petros Getadardz (1019-1058) to perform the Catholicos-water blessing ceremony.
In Trabzon) The next hint is related to 1030 և 1036-37. with the eclipses of what happened.
  In this regard, the manuscripts of the "Vision" attributed to Kozern are preserved in the manuscripts, which informs us that the terrified princes, honorably, turned to Shan, the saint, proclaimed by his holiness Hovhannes Kozernvard, is this event?
  According to The Vision, he linked eclipses to the bad behavior of people who had turned away from God.
 Rev. Hovhannes Kozern addressed those people, saying: "My children, from now on, the rulers and leaders of the opposition will close the doors of the church, and the order of holiness in the churches and the ordination of the house of greed will be revived by many unworthy people, and they will turn me into a priest." and at that hour Christ is offered by the unworthy. and many unworthy messengers to them, not for salvation, but for condemnation and loss of their souls. and where shall I find the true sacrament of Christ the sacrament of my nation?
 It is noteworthy that Nikoghayos Mar, Jond Alishan and Ashot Hovhannisyan think that the work "Vision" belongs to Kozernich, but is dictated by the political situation, where the idea of ​​help expected from the Latins is used.
 However, Hakob Kyoseyan thinks that the supposedly initial version of the vision, which has not reached us, may have been written taking into account the political expectations of the Armenian Byzantine party.
e) We find the name of Hovhannes Kozern attested in Smbat Sparapet's "Yearbook".
  It is connected with Petros A. Return (1019-1058) to participate in the water blessing ceremony in Trabzon with the Catholicos.
f) We find a reference to Hovhannes Kozern in his work "Chronology" by Samuel Anetsi.
  It is connected with 1037. with the eclipse of the sun. "The eclipse was overcast and there was a severe famine, and the great monk Kozern Hovhannes mourned and said that he had regulated the falsification, and from the worthy priest of my world."
Thus, the bibliographic evidence helps to recognize John Kozern not only as a historian, but also as a highly respected scholar who had no equal in his time.
The second of the life-organizing beneficiaries, "the first of the Genesis of the Enlightenment, Hakob Kyoseyan rightly mentions that Hovhannes Kozern Taronetsi had not only knowledge of practical theology, but also the gift of going to the Bible.
  The brilliant proof is the three works of the book preserved in his manuscripts, the interpretation and the mystical explanation, and the third is a sermon spiced with hermitic thoughts. ”
According to Urhayetsi, Kozern authored the works "Letter of Faith" and "History of the House of Bagratuni", which were not preserved.
  H. Kurtyan mentions that Kozern died and was buried in a place probably called Kozer in Yerevan.
    Thus, concluding with the biography of the famous Archimandrite Hovhannes Kozern, let us move on to the discussion of racial issues in his work "Commentary on the Calendar".
Creative Information As we have said, Hovhannes Kozern authored a very important work on the "Commentary Book", which is also known as the "Commentary on the Book Created by John the Baptist, nicknamed Kozern".
  We are aware of 2 published versions of this commentary, which were published by H. Kurtyan և Ջ. Einatyan.
  While publishing, Kurtyan used the's EC. from a manuscript of the century.
  And J. Eintyan chose համար to compare the following manuscripts for the original of Hovhannes Kozern's work: CU No. 2292, 1999, 2001, 3587, 10200, 7040 ագիրը The manuscript used by H. Kurtyan.
  And for Kozern's "Reason for the title, which is written after the" Commentary on the Calendar ", J. Einatyan used the following 4 manuscripts: MM Hmr 1973,6017, 7098 և H. The manuscript used by Kurtyan.
It is difficult to say whether J. How many rules does the original "The Interpretation of the Book Created by Archimandrite Johannis, nicknamed Kozern" published by Einatyan has, because it is not written in the form of questions and answers? In general, the rules are not separated.
  To make this clear, let's say that, for example, there are 2 rules in the original for a double, 3 rules for the overlay, and 2 rules for the seven.
 If we count the rules separately, the total number of them will be 18, and the work entitled "Reasons to bring or not to open" will have 10 rules.
  It is noticeable that these two works are dedicated to the same issues of the great Armenian year.
 It should be noted that these two are separate parts of each other or were written on different occasions.
It is interesting that Kurtyan first used "պատ Reason", based on the original he used, and Eintyan - the opposite.
There is an opinion according to which, from the most recent works of Anania Shirakatsi who lived after that, they copied and even "literally" copied.
 That is why let us bring some facts in comparison with Anania Shirakatsi's "Commentary on the Calendar Andreasay".
It should be noted that, unlike Anania Shirakatsi, the commentary on the "Commentary on Andreasay" by Hovhannes Kozern, the commentary on "The Commentary on the Calendar" was not written in the form of a question and answer.
  Ջ. Eynatyan's original published in Kozern's commentary lacks "what is a month, what is a half-moon, what is a retreat, what is a nineteen, what is it that says" a cult ", what is it? to say "XE. (45) But when he saith unto the moon, What is this that he saith unto thee? (13) and the retreat ", what is it to say," Kal zveradirn, march without a half ", what is it, kal ZZ (46), what is it, to say that the generalized is more in the same month It is a supplement, and if it is less, it will come out in the first month ", which are available in the" Commentary on Andreasay Calendar ".
  And as we will present in the above, Hovhannes Kozern edited some rules, such as, for example, the rules of Garnanamut ետ Avetik Gentile.
 The passage we have brought is the proof that the more we say that Hovhannes Kozern completely copied even a word և imitated Shirakatsi, it is not so.
We do not doubt that Hovhannes Kozern used Shirakats, but comparing these two interpretations, we can clearly point out the original features, but at the same time there are problems that are mentioned in both interpretations.
Let us say that at the beginning of his commentary Hovhannes Kozern explains the correspondence of the year in 552/553 of the July calendar, combining Navasard 1 with different dynastic years, which unequivocally show the year 552.
  And by examining the month-date of Christmas, Arats 30, it testifies to the correspondence of the second part of the Armenian calendar, 553.
 Let's bring the mentioned part. "Therefore, because on the month of Arats in Ln (30) he met to put the Armenian nation in the hands of Ananias Shirakatsi, the thirteenth (10) year enthroner of the Armenian Catholicos Johannis, that IG. (23) was the number of the patriarchs in St. Gregory and IE. (25) the emperor Justinian, in the foundation of the great church of St. Sophia, and in IE. (25) Amin Khosrov, king of Persia. Now, in this year, the number was given, RJHZ. (5976) was from Adana to the Armenian year.
 And from the birth of Christ to the departure of St. Gregory from Virap are all MHZ. (276), to be from the birth of Christ to the Armenian year of AD. (552) ».
In his commentary, Hovhannes Kozern then makes a double transition and says that the month of Navasard does not have a double.
 And what is the reason for that, he gives the following answer: "There is no double of Navasard.
 And what is the reason? because the week is E. (7) days, and the month is L. (30).
 And when you take a week in the month, be D. (4) Saturday and B. (2) days. call it double.
 And because Navasard's double is not taken personally, because B. (2) the day that more than f. (4) the week, it shall be in the next month. "
  In the next section of the commentary, the author shows the procedure for counting doubles in the months following Navasrd, as follows: "Because of that, Hor's monthly B. (2) be the rest in Navasardo.
 Likewise, the horrible double of Hori, which was taken from Navasard and the useless addition, to be D. (4) days, offer it to Sahmo.
 In the same way you know the other. for it shall be according to the ordinance, until it be a Sabbath, and it shall be so.
  As can be seen from the passage, the double rule ordered by Hovhannes Kozern did not differ from the same rule ordered by Anania Shirakatsi.
  It is clear that Kozern used the work of Anania Shirakatsi in defining this rule.
He was very interested in us - the rule set by Hakob-Crime about double.
  The latter raises questions in the part concerning the double in the interpretation, answers that question.
  His question refers to the following problems: what is a double, how should it be counted, why should it be repeated, or why should it be doubled?
  The rule set by Hakob Grimetsi has a feature that we have not noticed in the previous authors we have listed, which is that "it was because he took the name twice."
  The famous answer gives the following answer to it. "։ Fourth, why the name was perceived as double, because all the names are composed of three parts: object (subject, material), art արվեստ sound.
 And from it, as we say "sapat 1", because it contains something else like bread, "jar", because it has a hole (hole, niche) inside it, "closed 2", because it is to cover the head, "Karas" - water here (there is water here) or wine.
  From the voice. Because of the bird's chirping, we call it a "sparrow" պատճառով because of its croaking, "crow" պատճառով because of its crowing, "crow" պատճառով because of its "talking".
From art, as for carpentry, "carpenter", as for a spider, for weaving a web, "cobweb", for making honey - "bee", ուր for making a nest - say "gurparar" 3.
 Also, the double name was perceived from art, because the double invention was made by repeating it ”4.
 This section beautifully presents the problem of a double name, which is a feature that differs from the comments of previous authors.
The next issue that Kozern discusses in his "Commentary Book" is the issue of repatriation.
  Note that the top is the height of the Moon on the last day of the year.
 The monk mentions why 11 people should be summed up from Jortq every year. Let's bring the passage: "և because every year the moon rotates 11 days earlier 1" Sapat "means 1. a basket, 2. a box.
2 "Closed" means 1. a headdress, a bundle, 2. a headscarf for women.
"Gurparar" means "the bird that hangs its nest from the branches of a tree in the form of its tatman".
We have turned the passage from Old Armenian into world language.
performs better than the sun.
 Because on the fourth day of creation God created the Sun in the morning and the Moon in the evening.
 At the time of the creation of the Moon (from the course of the Moon) 11 parts were missing from the course of the Sun.
 And it lasts 11 hours in a month, and 11 days in a month.
 And that is what is called overhead.
 Now that you want to count the surrogates, the surrogates of the previous years must be counted every year11.
 This is the reason for convening. "
  Then he explains why in the last year of the 19th anniversary we should add 12 և and not 11.
"։ The reason is that from the year of completion of April 13, which is the beginning of the whole, in the sense of counting, until March 25, the end of the whole, there are particles (relics) left every year.
  And they accumulate, they accumulate, և there are 361 particles in the whole 19-year-old, which are 30-part 12 hours և there remains only one particle… That is why 12 should be added in the last year of the 19th year.
 And this must be done so that the overlay is infallible.
 And when he says "H (8) at once", because before putting the Armenian year in the first year the overhead was 22, and when putting the year - 3.
 And when you add it up, you get 11.
  And by adding it to the old overlay, you get 22, and combining 11 and 22, you get 33.
 Removing the old overlay - 22 և the new overlay - 3, remains 85.
 And this is why it is said "Y (8) just march…".
rule of law.
Summarizing the regulations of Hovhannes Kozern on the Taronatsi priest, let us state that at first he does not explain what a veranda is, he immediately makes a transition to "adding 11 every year". Maybe that is why he immediately moves on to defining another issue.
  As a general point, let us mention that the idea of ​​"Again, the twilight days, when the Sun goes longer than the Moon, they called it"'s "defined by Shirakatsi, is formulated by Hovhannes Kozern.
Before him, it should be noted that the famous historian Prof. R. Vardanyan's research has led to the discovery of the fact that Anania Shirakatsi has created SHLB-year-old Easter lists with "July" and "Armenian" calendars.
 We have to turn 5 Scriptures from Old Armenian into world language.
On December 31, 552, the Moon was 30 days old (that is, the return is 0), which became the next lunar year of 553, or in other words, the first year of Sh.
Fixed value in the July calendar Every 19 years, over the years, they are repeated the same every 19 years, that is, the system of July calendar returns has a 19-year periodicity.
 It should be noted that Anania Shirakatsi used the system of small Roman or Roman-Byzantine vestibules in compiling the Roman series of Sh.
  The great historian Anania Shirakatsi set the values ​​of the quintet and the six from the year of completion of April 2 (present 554), but the system of superscripts began from the first year of the 19th, that is, from the year of completion of April 4 (present 562). It was the 10th year in terms of Sh-'s calculation.
 The return value here is T (9).
 Shirakatsi added 11 every next year, and in the 10th year of the 19th century (present 571) he added 12.
  This year was the last year in terms of Sh-'s calculation.
  According to Sheak, in the sense of counting, the increase in the value of the overlap by one in the last year had a possible reason հավասար, that is, to equalize the solar's lunar years.
As for the issue of verandas in the Armenian mobile calendar, it should be noted that the verandah in the Armenian series is the height of the moon on the last day of the previous year of the Armenian movable calendar, at 5 More.
 It should be noted that the system of overlays is available in the editions of the Armenian "Copies".
  On the 5th, Lusin was in G. (3) daily, which has become the Armenian one-year overdraft.
  Unlike the July calendar, the system of superimposers in the Armenian mobile calendar does not have a 19-year periodicity. We will talk about the reason for this below.
 That is why Anania Shirakatsi has established a rule, according to which the Armenian year is multiplied by 11, 8 are removed from the product, then the retreat number, then the 19-digit number must be added, and the overlap is obtained.
  Vardanyan thinks that the sum rule is derived from 10 in the year of each retreat, 12 in the last year of the 19th anniversary, and if the year of retreat and the last year of the 19th anniversary coincide, 11 should be added.
  It may be noted that the orthodontist also served as a means of determining the height of the phases of the Moon on a daily basis, for which he should know the "Golden Arrow".
 And to find the "Golden Number" of the year means that it is the new year of the new moon period or the 19-year period discovered by Meton.
 It should be noted that when compiling calendars for the 532-year period of the Armenian calendar year, Shirakatsi used the system of retailers listed in the table below, which would be different from other retailer systems.
Table 1.Gold FiguresVoardsRollowerDesignsRoaders System of Overlays Ժ 14 Ե Ժ Ժ Ժ Ի Է Ի Ա Ժ Ի Դ Դ Ի Ի Ե Ժ Ի Թ Ի ներից From the data in Table 1 it should be assumed that this system of overlays consists of years.
  During the leap years in Hayotstomaro, instead of 11, the overhead is 10.
  And this is the reason that, unlike the system of July registers, it does not have a 19-year periodicity.
The next issue that Hovhannes Kozern raises in his work "Commentary on the Calendar" is the issue of E-dream.
First of all, let's say that deciding on an e-dream means finding what day of the week is a given day.
 Let's bring the passage about the seven in the work of Hovhannes Kozern "Commentary on the calendar". "As for E-yerakimas, why does G. say? (3) add or D. (4) subtract as many as putting the Armenian year in the seven G. It was (3), և when the (Armenian) year was set, (the seven) was 4.
 Thus. When you count the seven, you have to G. (3) add or d. (4) subtract so that the seven are full ('s full), յուր the desired will be easily found.
  Then, if you want to know where the seven comes from, take the YKE of the year. (365) days, weeks divide E., E. (7-7) days, the balances of the year grow, until E. (7), then becomes the first again ”6.
 When bringing the rule, Hovhannes Kozern basically repeats Anania Shirakatsi.
It should be noted that each calendar system had a rule for determining the seven of the year.
  To find the seven in the Julian calendar, you have to add 3 (subtract 4) to the Roman year, divide the amount by the 28-year period. Ignoring the quotient, take the remainder of the division.
A peculiarity should be noted between the Armenian and July calendars on the issue of the G7.
  If the seven is to be decided according to the Armenian calendar, then the result obtained after the operation must be divided into 7, and in the case of the July calendar - 28, because every 4 years is a leap year.
  That is why the period of the Orhuly calendar is equal to the product of the period of the Lent years (7 x 4 = 28).
It should be noted that in the Armenian calendar bibliography we have received numerous editions of "Copy of the Armenian Calendar", in which the authors have determined the seasons of the solar year by different rules (Spring, Summer, Celestial, Astronomical) The times of the holidays (Revelation, the Mother of God, the Transfiguration of the Mother of God, the Holy Cross) with the months-dates of the Armenian movable, immovable calendars, as well as with the immovable registers of many other peoples, especially in July.
  If the seasons of the year and the names of the holidays are definite and understandable concepts, then the terms Anastakegh and Elastegh have not been examined in detail or have simply been understood as the setting of a star or the rising or setting of a star.
  And G. is dedicated to this very problem. Simonyan's extensive article, which seems to give a new lease of life to the mentioned terms, comprehensively examines them in depth.
  Our reference to this issue should not seem strange, because we have a rule about Ankastel եղի about Elastag in the text of Hovhannes Kozern's "Commentary on the Calendar".
6 We have turned the passage from Old Armenian into world language.
The latter presents the following rule. "And because of the unstarred, Ziase" H. (8) on the retreat ", because to put the year without the star Mary T. (9) (Prof. R. Vardanyan corrected "Marery T" (9) to Mareri Y. (8)), because Ը (8) for he hath taken away the moon.
 Also in Margats XIX. (19) (Prof. R. Vardanyan corrected "Margats XIX" (19) directed by Margats XVI. (18)) was the star, Vasnayorik XV. (18) He will bring it on, so that the month may be full and he will find what he is asking for easily. "
  As we have mentioned many times, Hovhannes Kozern mainly took his definitions from Anania Shirakatsi's calendar collection աս Atanas Taronatsi's "Copy", where fixed numbers allowed to determine the months and dates of the Armenian mobile calendar according to the Armenian calendar. events.
  It should be noted that early historians, including Hovhannes Kozern, took the number of retreats of the Armenian Great Year, "add to a fixed number, subtract, if necessary, get the years of the separate days of the Armenian movable calendar with 30 remainder."
  Presenting a lot of important information about the constellation, let us mention that G. Simonyan presents the hypothesis that Mushroom լ The ridges refer not to the fall and origin of some stars (Builk-Bazumk, Shnkan, Alkion), but to the specific names of those stars or Elastgars of those stars or constellations.
 By this logic, Anastasteh should be understood as the name of a star or constellation named Ank or Zank, and Elastast as the name of a star or constellation named Elkam Yegh, as can be found in various writings or commentaries.
  Evkanina և AnkastghiZankmayst multi-star synonym, then in this case we can say with confidence that we are talking about a constellation.
In his commentary on the calendar, Rev. John speaks about the arrival of spring, winter, and autumn, as well as the analysis of a number of holidays, such as the Holy Cross, the Mother of God, and their institutions.
  It should be noted that Hovhannes Kozern gives the months-dates of the mentioned holidays to the date of the Armenian Revelation, Easter - the 532-year-old Easter list.
  According to Anania Shirakatsukatsats Eynatyan, we have noticed something very important in the months-dates of our mobile calendar. The full moon is placed in the part of the full moon of Easter. (3), and Easter is the 14th of Mary. (14).
 But the supplement should not be MareryG. (3), other Marie E. (7).
  In our opinion, it is a typographical error, because in the first year of Sh-eak, the fullness of the Moon (7), which is confirmed by the Shirakatsi's list.
  It should be noted that the two orphaned interpretations end with "Yaghags erits zhamots", the author of which, according to Einatyan, is not Kozern.
 The "Three Hours of Yaghags" ends with a very interesting part, which defines the numerical values ​​of the trees.
  Without referring in detail to all the holidays in the commentary, the astronomical phenomena and their constants, we would like to put a prof here at once. R. The "Copy" periodical of Hovhannes Kozern restored by Vardanyan, which will show the time of the toneritonion more accessible and concrete.
John Kozern kargats "copies" amsasharkeHastatuntivAnsharzh orvaanvanumeHayots sharzh.tarva amsvaansashark (1-30) NerkatvakanAghyusak 2.GarnanamutNawasardAnkasteghNawasardElasteghSahmiAmarnamutTreAstuatsatsinSurb KhachKaghotsAratsAshnanayinMehekiYisnakAhkiDzmerayinMareriYyatnuteanbarekendanMareriYaytnutiwnMareriTearnendarajHrotitsNshenk that tveriverin border amsasharki table in the first series in 1004, and the 2nd series of internal borders in 1011.
  The average year is 1007.
  R. Vardanyan prefers the middle year, emphasizing once again that Kozern wrote the "Explanation of Tsrazatk" in 1007, when he was the last Tsrazat of Sh-eyak's first round.
Note that R. Vardanyan brings in his work "The decision of the time of the editions of the" Armenian copy of the calendar "(6th-18th centuries)" another table, which mentions the names of real holidays, seasons, astronomical phenomena, constants of the first period of the first period of Sh. in the fourth year, the constants after Navasard 1, the time of the change of the constants և the author of the "Copy" rule և the time.
It is noticeable that Hovhannes Kozern edited the rules of Garnanamut և "Avetik al-Azegats".
  Speaking of the rules of Spring, let us mention that he made 13 constants 8.
  The spring law changed from 1004, և 13 constant value turned into 8.
  The latter was interpreted by Hovhannes Kozern.
 There are 13 solid traces in the "Copies" of the CU No. 1973, 3846 և 2001, which show that the calculation comes from the first round of Sh.
  It should be noted that in the "Copies" of the inscriptions of the CU No. 1999 և 3846, there is also the number 13 with its addition, that is, "zavelis han", which means the conversion of 13 constants into 8.
Completing the work, let us say that in 1007 Hovhannes Kozern wrote the work "Commentary on the Calendar", where he edited the "Copy".
  This is evident from the analysis of the data of "Yarakayk", from the examination of Avetik, a foreigner, from the "Spring Days" exam, as well as from the data of the "Movable Days" Armenian mobile register.
  The information of Matthew Urhayetsi about the interpretation of the last Tsrazatk (1007) by Sh., Which is connected with the names of Hovhannes Kozern և GorgHndzetsi, becomes clear.
  Hovhannes Kozern, based on Anania Shirakatsi's Easter speech, wrote a commentary on Tsrazatk, which was in the "Commentary on the Calendar" as an integral part.
  The year of Tsrazatk is 1007, so Matteos Urhayetsi indirectly gave the date of writing of the work "Commentary on the Calendar".
To sum up, Kozern's work "Commentary on the Calendar" is the only commentary known to modern historians, which is free from the interruptions of later centuries in connection with the Emin-Deacon calendar system.
  Probably a factor as to why they're doing so poorly - in contrast to, for example, Kozern's "Vision," of which about 50 copies are known.
  The number of copies of the self-discussed original does not exceed one dozen.
