The financial market is a special sector of the economy, formed by specialized financial institutions, where relationships are established between different participants, the subject of which are financial assets, financial instruments, as well as related financial services [1].
 The development of the financial market is conditioned by the development of its separate segments, as well as the level of their interconnectedness.
  Accordingly, there is a need to study the activity of the RA financial market sectors.
  Thus, let's try to study the banking system interaction banks of the Armenian banking system, which are large participants in both the state and e-corporate securities market.
 Banks listed on the stock exchange own the majority of corporate bonds.
The part of Armenia, that is, it can be said that the spheres of corporate bond market activity are expanding due to the banks.
  We can see all this in the specific weights of the volume of loans provided by commercial banks.
Investments in Securities Chart 1 ․ The weight of loans provided by securities investments in the structure of commercial banks' assets in 2018 [2] (2019) made investments in securities.
  All this is connected with the fact that Armswissbank is considered an investment bank.
  Then there is Mellatbank with its high share, which made 48% in 2018 and 43.7% in 2019.
  These indicators show not only the investment orientation of banks, but also the main orientation of the bank.
  We can also say the fact that in case of Mellat Bank's rather low assets և having a favorable position in the market, the best source of income is investing in securities, which Mellat Bank does.
It should be noted that the majority of investments are made in government bonds.
Chart 2. The weight of loans and securities investments in the structure of commercial banks' assets in 2019 [2] Chart: Out of 3 plain government bonds, Mellat Bank has the largest volume of 99.93%, followed by HSB-Sibank - 99 who?
 Artsakh Bank has the lowest share - 55.05%.
As for corporate bonds, it should be noted that the majority of corporate bond issuers belong to banks, that is, it can be said that the corporate bond market is created due to the banks, with which the investments made by banks in those bonds are connected.
Almost 90% of the investments are made by banks.
BondsGovernment Chart 3. Share of Commercial Banks Investments in Government Bonds in Investments in General Securities as of the End of 2018 [2] The analysis concludes that the majority of securities, especially government bonds, belong to from the banking system.
In addition to the connection between the banking system and the securities market, there are also connections between other markets.
  Now let's try the connection between the securities market and the banking system.
You can see it in Figure 4.
If we look at the investments made by insurance companies in recent years, we will see that deposits in banks have been observed by companies more than in securities all year round.
  It is true that the volume of investments in deposits has decreased (from 52% to 33.8%), in contrast to investments in securities (increased from 11% to 22.6%), but still the volume of investments in deposits is higher, if will continue at the same pace, in the future investments in securities will exceed deposits.
It should be noted that in 2011 the highest rate of deposits in banks was observed in insurance systems, amounting to 46.3%, and in securities - in the first quarter of 2019.
Figure 4. Pension funds in bank և securities deposits Ապ in the structure of insurance system assets.
The share of mandatory investments in 2010-2019 [2] Mandatory pension funds have been invested in the Republic of Armenia since 2014.
  In 2019, fund managers in Armenia have a licensed investment fund manager: "Amundi ACBA Asset Management Armenia" CJSC and "J Quadrat Ampega Asset Management Armenia" LLC.
Let's study the investments of those 2 funds in banks and securities market for 2014-2019.
  But before referring to the volume of investments, let us first show the volume of net assets of pension funds.
Pension Funds As we can see, pension funds are increasing their net assets from 31.5 billion to 198.4 billion, an increase of almost 6.2 times.
 How can we assume that their role in the financial markets is increasing, which can contribute to the expansion of their activities in the financial market?
Now let's talk about their investments.
Figure 5. Volume of net assets of pension funds in 2015-30.06.2019 (billion) [2] The chart shows that in 2014 the main part of investments was directed to bank deposits, and already in 2015 the volume of equity bonds increased.
  The volume of government bonds in the assets of the funds made 42.5% or 13 billion drams.
Then, in 2016, the volume of investments in non-government bonds increased by 3 percentage points, amounting to 7%, which indicates the activation of the non-government bond market, and investments in deposits increased by 4 percentage points, accounting for 27% of total assets.
  As for the second quarter of 2019, investments in deposits increased by 38% in total assets, and in the same sector, investments in government bonds decreased by 25% or 49 billion drams [3].
Despite the role of pension funds in the large securities market, the majority of assets are directed to the banking system, in particular, in the second quarter of 2019, 38% of assets were directed to the banking sector, and 25% to government bonds.
Figure 6. Investments of pension funds in 2014-30.06.2019 [2] From all this we can conclude that, over time, other institutional investors appeared in the market, who also carried out the functions of further investment of the collected funds, but, as you can see. The predominance of banks has not decreased.
  In many cases, it is the banks that can determine, for example, the dynamics of further development of the securities market.
How can we say that the majority of securities, especially government bonds, belong to banks, due to which the banking system is active, just as the securities market becomes highly dependent on the banking system.
In addition to the above interactions, it should be noted that each of the orphanage market segments can play a role in ensuring economic growth, which we will show through correlation.
The aim of the study is to analyze the impact of Armenian financial market segments on GDP.
  For the analysis of bank loans, insurance premiums, used corporate government bonds, bond dates.
  The analysis was performed using the "EViews 11" software package.
Volumes ևShares volume is related to GDP.
  From Table 1 of securities we can see that the impact of all components on GDP is positive.
  In the context of correlation analysis, loans from commercial banks have the most significant impact on GDP from financial market segments, which is 0.998 with GDP.
  It is assumed that the change of 1 credit point will lead to a change of 0.998 points of GDP.
 It should be noted that the closer the correlation is to the 1st, the more significant the government bonds have from the strong market, then the corporate bonds, with which the correlation with the GDP made, respectively, 0.849 և 0.838.
 Then the insurance premiums are significant - 0.788.
  As for the impact of shares, it has a significant impact on GDP, it is only 0.125.
  In addition to the correlation with GDP, as we see, the correlation between loans և banks և government bonds ունի has a reserve premium և shares 0, 0.07.
And the weakest link is 0.85.
Conclusion.
 Thus, as a result of the correlation analysis, it became clear that the credit market had the greatest significant impact on GDP, followed by the government-corporate securities market, and lastly, the insurance market.
From all this we can conclude that, over time, other institutional investors have appeared in the market, who also performed the functions of further investment of the collected funds, but, as we see, the dominant role of the banks has not diminished.
In many cases, it is the banks that can determine, for example, the dynamics of further development of the stock market.
  How can we say that the majority of securities, especially government bonds, belong to banks, due to which the banking system becomes more active, just as the securities market becomes more dependent on the banking system.
