These “unfortunate little ones” need more special training than treatment.
Maria Montessori [3] Inclusive education is not a separate type of education.
  It is a feature of education, which presupposes the implementation of education in accordance with the needs of each child.
  Inclusive education is a program, the implementation of which is based on the idea of ​​equality, which excludes all forms of discrimination against children, ensures equal treatment of everyone.
Salamanca conference participant B. The Lindervist report states: "All the children and teenagers of the world, with their strengths, weaknesses, their hopes and expectations, have the right to education, not our educational systems have the right to certain types of children.
 Therefore, it is the school system of the country that must be adapted to meet the needs of all children. "[4]
On December 1, 2014, the Republic of Armenia enshrined the inclusion of universal inclusive education in the Republic of Armenia, declaring inclusive education as a guarantee of the right to education of every child.
  At the heart of this policy is child-centered pedagogy [1; 2, 4].
  The main mission of universal inclusion is one - to create such an environment։ that no child is left out of education.
This applies to both those with different physical needs and those with special needs.
The essence of the organization of inclusive education includes two interrelated components: 1) development of inclusive pedagogical-psychological methods, content of education և principles and approaches to education, 2) creation of special environmental conditions ացում implementation of joint work.
The cooperation implies not only a multifaceted organization of public education policy requirements: society - community - family - school - classroom.
  If the role of the state is to create the necessary structures, normative documents, development of financial and economic activities, methodological guidelines for the implementation of the adopted policy, organization of various assistance, training and other processes to the participants, then to participate in the organization of inclusive education. will become the wealth of the society.
The role of each can be the continuous development, with the experience of individual structures, nature. This educational process will not be easily carried out only by the adoption of the law and the definition of the content of education.
many challenges.
 These include: Providing • Awareness of the nature of inclusive education in different segments of society; • Reviewing general education • Vocational education programs; the need to organize all training sessions, • to create experience exchange platforms, etc.
The success of the process will be expected in the case of the sympathetic and active participatory contribution of each of them, within the framework of their activities and the role of the society.
One of the most influential factors hindering the effective organization of general education is the lack of awareness - the misunderstanding of the meaning of inclusive education by different segments of society.
 Many people mistakenly consider only students with physical or mental disabilities to be included (to make it more understandable, the most common needs in school are: mental retardation of children, visual, auditory, motor, behavioral-psychological disorders, moderate, severe և deep ).
  This perception is due to the protests of parents with healthy children for both objective and subjective reasons, such as the presence of a child in the classroom (such children cause psychological stress for ordinary children, take away their time for education, "dangerous", "socially", "socially").
The perception of the environment is also wrong. From the point of view of the parents of many children with problems (especially in rural areas due to traditional stereotypes, favorable physical conditions and other factors), from the professional psycho-pedagogical point of view.
Environmental, unprepared, The region has been included in the general inclusion since September 2019).
 The possible result was a significant positive change in the attitude and perceptions of teachers in the region towards inclusive education, the perception by many of the importance and inevitability of organizing such education, which is a stimulus for further effective activities.
  Of course, the almost absence of feedback, reporting mechanisms, as well as manuals and professional guides could not ensure the full effective implementation of the universal inclusion ideology through training կազմակերպ quality education.
  In fact, not only to provide quality education, but also to have mental satisfaction, the facilitator needs a variety of methodologies in his daily activities, to use the existing ones correctly, to use the suggestions presented in them correctly, to try the methodological seminars.
They are definitely implemented by different competent organizations (schools).
  However, given the wide geography of teachers, it is clear that the current measures are not sufficient to ensure the required quality of education in a short period of time (by 2022, the transition to universal inclusion must be completed in the country).
Involvement of Beneficiaries If the educator possesses psychological and pedagogical approaches appropriate to the special needs of the learners, he / she will change from an avoiding, resisting actor to one who initiates and implements changes for SEN children [4].
Therefore, we believe that the most effective response to provide the literate specialists with the necessary literacy and general skills in general education in the relevant pedagogical vocational courses "Peculiarities of the organization of inclusive education" is the introduction and study of the
As a possible way to implement the above proposal, I present our main approaches to the organization of theoretical and practical training on the topic "Peculiarities of organizing education on the initiative of teaching biology" without limiting the creative scope of each specialist to solve the problem.
"Goals learning NerarakandasentatsinerarvatstsragrumTsragrum subject to: • theoretical material presented to students (apagausutsichneri) biology, irazekvatsutyunenerarakanutyangaghaparakhosutyan and requirements, tsanotatsnelhamendhanurbnagitutyankimiayievshrjanaknerumkhndrievartasahmanyan us access to educational and metodakanashkhatanknerin, hayrenakankatarvatshnaravor • theoretical knowledge to the students the required depth for physical or spiritual khangarumneriarajatsmanhatukmankavarzhakan education of children of different kariknerunetsogh) displays , on age characteristics, as well as on the special educational requirements of students with various disorders and disabilities.
• Practically shape and develop students: • Transform the learning of children with different needs, enrich, synthesize, process them; • Discuss, analyze, make sound suggestions from classmates' approaches. • Classroom-tailored, tailor-made, child-centered, standardized, and standardized. skills.
According to the methodology we have developed in the practical lessons: • Characteristic descriptions of the most common needs with different needs are created in the classroom (already mentioned above) with descriptions of special educational needs, knowledge and abilities, which become a guide for further individual work of all students.
  It is recommended to present the conditional attitude of the family towards the needs and education of their child.
to be studied • With the consent of the audience, one lesson or topic of the child's conditional (or subject in the classroom) is chosen.
  Individual or collaborative work (depending on the number of students, the amount of time allocated for practical lessons or other circumstances) is recommended to develop educational, pedagogical-psychological approaches to teaching biology adapted to one or two characters to discuss each practical lesson (to some extent familiar to teachers already familiar with assessment).
  A possible advantage of this option is the ability to find an effective solution to pluralism on the same issue.
  In case of lack of lessons, adaptations for individual characters can be presented during the same lesson by different groups or individuals.
• General guidelines for pedagogical-psychological analysis as a result of submission, discussion, and methodological editing of practical lessons.
• Using the created approaches, the students develop individual suggestions for lesson plans, steps adapted for children with different needs and classic organizing materials, tasks in the classroom, as a result of editing, the final assignment is prepared - to prepare for the lesson.
about.
  Plans are discussed as needed. Distributive plan • A pilot lesson is organized in the classroom on the principle of cooperation.
 A discussion is held, proposals for the reform of the classical organization are presented, on the basis of which each student elaborates his / her individual final work.
  These works supplement the resources for the study of the topic in the following years.
In this case • Opportunity lessons (for example, the study of internships during the course, or children with similar needs in the internship class) or their approaches are tested in the schools where the internships are held.
If • Successful experiments are presented on different platforms: student scientific, thematic conferences, seminars organized for different purposes, open lessons, etc., which contribute to the enrichment of the resources of professional-methodological approaches.
In addition to the above, in this academic year we will carry out a bachelor's degree to enrich the research work within the framework of the mentioned topic.
In the coming years, we will use the subject teaching program material to provide practical support based on the experience we already have during the trainings, seminars and trainings of other stakeholders.
Survey to teachers, sample-regionAs a way of further development of the work, we plan to: • Regularly organize round tables, student readings or other horse discussions at the university with the participation of ևspecialists of students from different faculties.
• Collaborate with inclusive nonprofit education և with public school professionals, parents և Experiment with the approaches created in the process of organizing the education of their beneficiaries, as he և, using their experience, enrich our knowledge and skills.
• Develop volunteer activities among students, including stakeholders in non-governmental organizations, internship schools, and other students selected as mentors.
• Carry out term, diploma and research works, enriching the resources of education approaches.
We hope that the proposed approaches will be applicable to the reform of all general education specialties studied in pedagogical universities or to the reform of "Pedagogy" course programs.
In accordance with the requirements, the availability of modern teaching methods for graduates will solve the problem of the need to fill schools with a large number of knowledgeable professionals.
