In 1905, Zapel Yesayan's novel "Scooter Lights" was published in "Arjelyan Press", where as a result of an intellectual clash, provisions aimed at improving the Armenian-Armenian identity were put forward.
The novel was referred to by Sjak Arzumanyan, who, while presenting the relations of Yesayannbutyun, noted that the writer showed "the envy of literary life" in the novel [1], and Grigor Peltyan saw some relations between Intra's "Inner World" և Zapel Yesayan's novel [2]. which were developed by Mark Nshanyan.
  The latter wrote that he was not interested in the way of revealing literary influences, but in "literature as a arena" [3].
The limits of the analysis dedicated to this "Scooter Uplum".
    In order to expand our goal, we have set a task to show realities that will contribute to a deeper study of the novel, will reveal the description of the Armenian intellectual of the early 20th century depicted there.
The urgency of the topic is substantiated by the fact that in the novel written in the first person, through the heroine who returned to Constantinople from France, the ideological principles of the Armenian intellectual woman of the beginning of the century, Zapel Yesayan, are shaken, which are still present today.
The beginning of the novel is colorful, Yesayan, faithful to his literary preference, immediately sobers up the reader by putting "Fair Sun's light" side by side. [2]
  The result is the beginning of the revelation of "emesis" and influential "conventional habits" [2], and step by step the clash of the intellectual's environment becomes a logical consequence of events.
"But…" but The author-hero manages to pull some problems before each other. As a result of his visit to the Korikyans' salon, the presence of people engaged in literature is considered useful by those present. The heroine confesses herself. "Surprisingly, the word literature embarrasses me and I feel red." [2]
  The main character, in order to complete the expulsion from the environment, presents the level of mental development of the people around him: "There are so many literates, what does it serve?" [2].
  The author immediately addresses the answer to Mrs. Eftiks. "Perhaps you assume that I am busy with the logic of serving you or serving others ..." [2].
  Here is the writer's orientation to match the low taste of those who look with irony at the basis of true, valuable grammar, to serve them.
 Let us recall the following statement of Zapel Yesayan, published in the 15th issue of "Masis" in 1905: "The writer or poet has done his duty to humanity, when he has done the grace to produce a beautiful work and to stir the souls with the beautiful excitement" [7].
It is not the personal interest that is created in the chain of events. The author makes a sharp transition from the living environment of prosperous people to the circle of people engaged in educational issues.
  It is expected that there should not have been a danger of alienation for the intellectual heroine here, but this time the author also feels the necessity of "but".
  At first he states: "There are no presumptions of at least Europeanization here" [2].
  It should be noted that Zapel Yesayan wrote in one of his articles that in order to achieve the perfect horse of European beauty, he needed "very stable material means, fine penetration of taste", which was not available to everyone.
  The positive mood is followed by the depiction of the teacher's description. The teacher, who had gone through the process of becoming a thin, skeptical teacher and supervisor, continued to complain about the reality around him, displaying an emphatic hatred of psyche;
  The same image is created by the author during another teacher's visit to Kyureghyan's house.
  Zapel Yesayan introduces the reader to the representatives of the intellectual life, whose goal is not the discovery of the truth, the scientifically literate debate, but the victory of one's own self.
  Another circumstance is emphasized here. The airy words never became action, no matter how loud they were.
  The question arises: can a generation with self-confidence, firm ideas, and words be formed in such an environment? The main character of the puzzlers on the issue.
  In this respect, the observations published on the pages of "Tsaghik" by Zappel Yesayan about the upbringing of children ժ teachers are interesting. The writer noticed that the upbringing of a child from the family often took the path of breaking his will, which hindered the independent teachers. [5]
  The protest against all this is obvious in the novel. The topic of unhealthy educational environment becomes more private in the classroom, when the heroine remembers the school environment. Reprimands for no reason, unhappy childhood due to the mental "moralization" of their educators. "Often the same" violent, low-level, strict , ironic և ruthless looks.
 According to the main character, the children's fingers were cut in this environment, this was perceived by him as a unique mental break.
  The performance of the song reaches its climax in the "E" section.
  Let us emphasize that the beginning is also positive here. Ս. The bells of Khach Church cover the soul of the intellectual with warm feelings, but the writer brings "but" again. The hymn of the children, anointed with sun and light, comes to interrupt the series of "Lord have mercy", the author warns. "Lord, O Lord, do you feel that the people over whom the pleading prayer passes will always bend the bow and fall down, weak, incapable, in all its hours, in the hours of its pain and despair," Lord "[2] ].
  There is a heartfelt alarm here: the people who have taken the path of reconciliation can not achieve their right to live.
  Let us remember the observations of another intellectual, Grigor Zohrap, on the preparation of an "enlightened clergy" upbringing, which he expressed in a speech in the same Scout. The latter considered the former a "work of salvation" and the latter a "work of exaltation".
There is a reference to feminism in the novel. The following observation is put forward. "Because of these meanings, extremely smart women are suffering." [2]
  It should be noted that Yesayan gave a unique definition of "mediocrity" to those who started a self-forgetful struggle on the stage of the feminist struggle. "... Women endowed with an exceptional intellect ... do not need to be educated in favor of their own opinions [" [6].
It is memorable that "Scutari's Apocalypse" ends with the memory of Scutari's onion. The visit of the heroine to Paghlarpashi cemetery is symbolic.
  No matter how much he rebelled against the injustices around him throughout the story, no matter how much he faced the environment, rebelled against the phenomena that hindered his intellectual development, he did not lose faith in a bright future. The visit of Perperyan schools to Duryan's grave warms his soul. "We must congratulate their elders, who wanted to put that respect and love in the hearts of the boy, for the poet of Scutari" [2].
Yesayan's novel ends with a positive mood and great hope. There are still people who instill in children respect for adults, and the writer had high hopes for that generation.
Let us pay attention to one important circumstance. In 1905, the last part of the novel "Scutari's Apocalypse" was published in the June 8 issue of "ArJelyan Press", and in the June 4 issue of "Masis" of the same year, we read the following words of Zapel Yesayan. "Hearts anointed with compassion and zeal that can understand and sing the beauties of everything, and again loving hearts that will have a mourning rebellion against ugly things." [7]
    This idea of ​​the author, in parallel with the published novel, can be considered as a brief description of the description of the main character of "Scooter Apocalypse".
 In the novel, the great desire of the writer to convey the beauties he saw to humanity is evident.
  For Zapel Yesayan, the natural and pure were the natural landscapes, the beautiful, multicolored endings of Scutari, with which the events took place. The wounds of the intellectual's soul were repaired by nature, but in the description of the author-hero the necessity of realizing the sobering "but" is noticeable.
It is noteworthy that years would have passed since the publication of the novel, but the writer's soul would continue to feel the desire-reality clash, the feeling of exile would accumulate in the writer so much that later he would get his unique image in the "Exiled" novel.
Let us conclude: "Scooter Lights" features the compassionate and patriotic description of an Armenian intellectual of the early 20th century. The author-hero gives the flaws of the environment, proposes observations aimed at improving the intellectual life.
