Preface.
  There are many methods of studying the river network, but all of them can be used only in the case of research on a few specific issues.
  Researchers' interest in the study of the river network is explained by the fact that it is a sensitive criterion, with the help of which the features of relief, geological structures, tectonic elements are revealed.
The latter will analyze the structural elements, the intensity of the processes of many tectonic movements, the degree of externalization (especially floods) depending on the nature of the tectonic movements, the intensity to predict further changes in the river network.
In recent decades, many works have been published [1,2,3,4], in which it is shown in detail that the results of the study of the slopes of the river can be used for structural analysis, to clarify the latest tectonic movements պայմանավորված due to these changes in river directions.
The "valleys" of the Established Hydrological Regime of the orbital landslides, changing their normal course of development, rapidly and sharply reflect the movements of the earth.
  The formation of the curve with lithological-related petrographic features with the latest tectonic-generated structural elements.
  A factor that can detect the change in longitudinal curvature is not the absolute magnitude of the change, but the segments with a positive ևnegative anomaly.
 You. A. Metcheryakov [2] և Other scientists consider anomalous segments to be the segments of the curvature of the sub-valleys, within which the slope is greater than in the adjacent segments, which lie above the segment. in this case the anomaly is positive.
According to N. A. Babok [1] calculations show that in some cases the fall of rivers is 2-3 times smaller than the sections that extend downwards in the areas below.
  The latter are considered negative anomaly segments.
  We used R. to distinguish positive և negative anomalies. Kh. The results obtained by Gaginyan (1989) (for the rivers Vorotan, Goris, Ildrimsu, Zabukh) to express the complete picture of the region, to increase the accuracy of the work, we have compiled the non-biographies of the Voghji, Araks, Tsav, Mazra rivers (Figure 1).
  In contrast to longitudinal curves, in this case the vertical axis of the graph shows the magnitude of the angle of inclination of the river (in degrees), which will allow to detect the slightest changes in the thallus.
The work presents the graphs of the angle of fall of the rivers Vorotan, Goris, Ildrimsu, Voghji, Mazru, Tsav, Araks rivers, in which the sections of positive-negative anomalies are clearly separated.
 Thus, near Vorotan there are 10 positive, 3 negative, near Goris river - 3 positive, 1 negative, Zabukhimot - 5 positive, near Ildrmsu - 3 positive, 1 negative [3], Voghjiimot - 5 positive, 2 negative, near Tsavi - 1 positive, 2 negative, Arax - 2 positive, 1 negative anomalies.
Fig. 1. Analyzes of anomalous changes in the course of rivers in the Zangezur region, we can say that they are due to structural changes, the latest tectonic movements or changes in elliptofations.
According to R. Kh. Gaginyan in the upper stream of Vorotan before the concavity of Aknadasht (3000-2130 m), then the positive anomalies of Sarnakunk village (1980-1750 m) due to a sharp shift.
  Negative anomalies with a syncline structure at altitudes of 2130-1980 m և 1750-1250 m, consisting of diatomite clays monogenic formations, sedimentary rocks, up to 600 m above the village of Ltsen, positive deflection due to ectonic irregularities associated with new ectonic disturbances.
  The negative disturbances at the altitudes of 2540-2510 m are connected with the fact that the river flows in this section with Pleistocene lava cover.
The Goris negative promise in the heights is conditioned by the collapse of the Ishkhanasar crater.
 The positive deflection at 2500-1800 m is the result of sawmill cracking, and at 1700-1400 m they are conditioned by the tectonic-lithological contact zone, which formed between the "effusive rocks" of Ishkhanasar crater.
 The positive deflection of 940-880 m is connected with the Goris stratigraphic-lithological contact zone և with the chalk rocks.
The positive anomaly observed in the upper reaches of the Ildrimsu River (2920-2240 m) is due to the tectonic-lithological contact of the effusive intrusions, and in the 2100-1600 m section, where the river bends like the Vorotan, it is connected with the tectonic uplift.
  A negative deflection section formed above the knee (2240-2100 m) due to the syncline structure of the sedimentary rocks.
The sediments of the river are conditioned by the tectonic-lithological touch of the effusive rocks և Goris stratum, limestone rocks [3].
Onomalver of the current The positive deviations of the upper stream of the Voghji River, which are located at 3100-2500 m for 2 km, are conditioned by the carriage that starts the Kajaran trog.
 The second part (with a positive deviation) corresponds to the Kajaran troj with a length of 6 km.
  The third is located in the "Shubadinimij" (upper part of Kajaran) of Kajaran, the reason for which is the active fracture passing through here, due to which the slope of the riverbed increases sharply.
  A sharp drop is observed in the Pkhrut river basin at 1500 m.
  The reason for this is the perm limestone exposed in Geghi anticline.
 A positive deviation is observed in the region of Shgharjik village, the existence of which is conditioned by the fracture of Khustup-Giratagh.
  The negative deflections observed upstream of Voghji are associated with syncline structures filled with volcanic rock.
We mentioned above that there are abrupt changes in the slope of Geghi, which are a consequence of the relative, general increase of this valley.
  In addition, the Hankavan-Zangezur elevation zones of deep fractures and fractures passing through here have a great influence.
Mazra մոտ Abrupt changes in fall near Tsav rivers are observed along the entire length of the riverbed curves, which is related to the general relative increase of the area.
The reason for the changes in the fall is the fracture passing through the upper stream of Mazraget և the block rise expressed in the relief here.
  The upstream deflection of the Araks is directly related to the block elevation expressed in relief.
 The only reason for the negative current deviation is that the river passes through the descending valley.
  And the other reason for the positive deviation is the fault passing through here ային the block increase expressed in the relief.
When we include all the distorted parts, which are tectonically connected, in the same zone (Figure 2), the boundaries of the main morphotectonic blocks, which have undergone shifts in modern times, become uncertain.
It should be noted that the relatively large angles of inclination correspond to the elevated sections reaching larger sizes.
  Thus, in the western part, all the distorted segments have a greater angle of inclination than the eastern one, therefore they are characterized by an asymmetrical structure.
Thus, the analysis shows that the latest tectonic changes in the area are inevitable.
  Thus, the whole area of ​​Zangezur is subject to increase.
Depending on the movements of the valleys, the northeastern part of the area rises less than the southwestern part.
  After that, in the future, the valleys of many rivers leading to Vorotan, Voghji, Mazra, Tsav և will still strive for a balanced curvature, which will lead to the deepening of the valleys.
Due to the rising differences in the tributaries of many rivers (Voghji և Geghi), the phenomenon of abduction is inevitable.
Thus, in the Kajaran mountain range, the northern slopes rise more than the southern ones.
Currently there is a clear slope difference. The southern one is steep, the northern one is gently sloping.
In the future, the process of taking the Geghivtaks by Voghji is predicted here.
In the region, a knee-jerk image has been created in the valleys of Ildrimsu, Vorotan and Voghji, which indicates that a general increase is observed in this direction.
 And in the future, if the speed of sawing speed increases, it is easy to notice that the formation of blockage lakes in these sections is inevitable.
  Thus, in the valleys of the Bugur river valley in Vorotan, there is a ring image of a vegetative network, which is a proof that some local nature is rising here.
 Later, depending on this, it is predicted that Bugur will start to erode the sunrise of his valley, to bend the valley more.
  Besides, in this section in the opposite direction.
  It is already clear what consequences the valleys will have as a result of fractures and fractures. In these sections, the angles of fall of the rivers will increase, at the same time the erosion activity of the river will increase.
(Vorotan) decisions flow. Conclusion.
  Thus, the analysis revealed that there is a well-defined relationship between longitudinal profile anomalies of river valleys, terrestrial rocks, modern tectonic movements, "contacts of lithophates."
In areas with a positive deviation, the nature and degree of the rise can be determined by the magnitude of the fall.
When we include all the distorted parts that are tectonically connected in the same zone, the boundaries of the main morphotectonic blocks that have been displaced in modern times are clarified.
In the near future, so to speak, there will be no decisive turns or major changes in the river valleys.
  The regional planners will keep their general plan, because the increase is observed throughout the region.
  If they were severely demarcated, big changes would be expected.
  However, the current nature of the latest tectonic movements in the area will not change.
