Preface.
  Today, underwater archeology is one of the most important branches of world archeology.
  Almost all developed countries (USA, Italy, France, England, Spain, Russia), as well as Turkey and Egypt, build their tourism on the basis of developing underwater archeology.
  However, there are countries that, having a rich underwater culture, are still not able to put this sphere into circulation.
Armenia does not belong to any of these countries.
  Rich water resources of Nachuni և does not have developed underwater archeology, but it does not mean that it does not have the tendencies and opportunities for the development of underwater archeology.
They are performed in small numbers on the bottom of the Sean basin, they show that it is necessary to develop this field in Armenia as well, especially since the development of tourism in Armenia is very urgent today.
The archeological study of the Sean basin has its studies, archeological complexities and peculiarities.
  However, for the development of Shirak archeology, it is also necessary to study the bottom of the Akhuryan Reservoir, the second largest water area in the Republic of Armenia.
  It is noteworthy that after the construction of the reservoir, a number of archeological monuments remained under water.
  Today these monuments need to be studied.
  Among these monuments we should mention ancient Shirakavan, Jrapi, Yerazgavors.
Today, when we base the development of the Republic of Armenia on the development of tourism, the development of underwater archeology is possible both in Armenia and in Shirak.
  In parallel with all this, it is possible to teach ideas about underwater archeology in republican universities within the framework of archeology courses.
  These courses are needed not only by historians, archeologists, sources, but also by students and masters studying in the departments of tourism.
  Therefore, we offer students, masters, history, teaching submarine features, development tendencies through special courses.
 On this basis, it is necessary to train underwater guides who will be able to organize underwater excursions.
Modernity, archeology - The work of diving was developed in ancient times, when swimmers dived in the waters of the Mediterranean, the Mediterranean Sea or European lakes, hoping to rob the sunken ships.
  During the Renaissance, there was a growing interest in ancient artifacts hidden in the water.
  It was associated with the development of archeology as a form of science and art history.
1446 L. B. With the help of divers, Albert tried to pull the Roman emperors out of the water with the help of specially prepared means. 37-54 Built իր Items of sunken ships 1.
1 The lake dried up in 1927-32, the ships were taken ashore and set on fire during the retreat of the Germans near the museum in 1944.
The enumerated examples can be duplicated, the purpose of which is that underwater archeology can provide materials for the study of all archaeological eras.
However, this term is sometimes called marine archeology.
covers the whole field of study.
  One of the leading specialists in underwater archeology, George F. Bass writes in this regard: “Marine archeology involves studies that are carried out except at the bottom of the seas when many finds are made in rivers, lakes, and wells.
Hydro-archeology presupposes the study of the ancient sources of water.
  A hybrid such as the term "aqualogia" is also not enough to describe this field.
  The archaeologist called this work "Underwater Archeology".
Professor R. From Orbeli's point of view, the term "underwater archeology" emphasizes the work of a diver on the seabed, under water, it involves the artificial extraction of ancient artifacts from the seabed.
  The scientist puts the term "hydrology" in a broader sense, prefers this term, and says, "The name is fully literate, precise, flexible, scientifically based."
"Archeology".
  However, the so-called direct mention is the first mention of diving in Armenian bibliography in 851. The historian mentions the word "deep" in Movses.
  The next mention is the mention of Grigor Magistros Pahlavuni, where the author mentions people who extract pearls in the XI century.
There are two such possible references in the XII century. The first is in one of the puzzles of Nerses Shnorhali, and the second is in the deep-seated references mentioned in the Armenian sources by Mikhail Asoru [2, pp. 93-97].
In the "Chronology".
Ruber Orbeli is considered to be the founder of underwater archeology.
  The first underwater works in the Soviet Union R. Orbeli performed in the 30s.
 He was assisted by EPRON divers.
. These studies by R. Orbelin described after his death in 1947. published in "Studies և Research" [4].
The eldest of the three talented brothers has always been far from the attention of the Soviet society.
  Apart from underwater archeology, he was fascinated by theology, he also has remarkable works in this field.
  His merit is great in the sphere of NAGEPRON 2 activities.
  Like Ruben Orbeli, this scientist devotes a significant part of his life to diving.
Underwater archeology historian Vyacheslav Taska in his work "Ancient Mediterranean underwater ancient archeology" (2009) presents R. The introduction of Orbeli. "Professor R. Orbeli's merit lies in the fact that he did not transfer the methods and tricks of scuba diving in mechanical underwater archeology, but redefined the history of the field so many decades ago, predetermining the modernity of the field today.
  Due to that, Professor R. Orbeli is rightly considered the ancestor of underwater archeology in Russia as an independent direction, and the archeological excavations near the Greek cities of the Black Sea coast "became the first pedagogical manual of our country" [6].
"Hydro-archeology: the foundations of the generations of archaeologists - the foundations of which they did not miss" As Ruben Orbeli said: "The diving organization for the first time in the world stood in the ranks of science, passing to the system of underwater excavations, a force to be reckoned with.
In the Soviet reality, the diver had the opportunity to become a historian in the presence of curiosity.
  A new field of historiography is being born - underwater archeology or hydro archeology. ”
  R. Orbeli developed a long-term plan to build an underwater archeological excavation system in the USSR in the Black Sea basin.
The beginning of the Great Patriotic War և the death of the scientist stopped the development of this field of science for a long time.
  The new stage of development of this sphere began in the 1950s. in the middle [6].
 In 1957 these works were started on the basis of light diving equipment.
 V. is in charge of the case. D. Blavatsky.
 The theory, which was at a rather weak level, is being replaced by practical stories.
  The material base-oxygen devices were studied in more detail.
 1957 B. Peters, I. Peters, joined the Pantikape underwater expedition in the summer of Smirnov, A. Blavatsky.
 The head of the expedition was VD Blavatsky.
    The activities of this expedition showed the need to replace oxygen equipment with scuba divers.
1958 By the summer of 1945, the expedition already had several Soviet quads provided by the MEI Diving Club.
1950s In the West, Jacques Yves Cousteau becomes the developer of the same case.
  At first, Jacques Yves Cousteau dived with the help of the Mask Tube, but then he developed a device that allowed him to breathe at great depth.
 He tested the world's first scuba diving in 1938, and this device helped not only him but many others to better explore the underwater world.
 Underwater shooting is not considered a supernatural phenomenon today, but before Couston, no one could have imagined such a thing.
  This talented scientist created a water-permeable camera, underwater lighting equipment, and later the first television series capable of video recording at great depth.
  1957 He was appointed director of the Monaco Oceanographic Museum.
 1973 He founded the Custo Union, which dealt with the marine environment.
  Jacques Yves Cousteau always collaborated with archaeologists, so the results of joint achievements were shocking.
Underwater archeological excavations over many decades have shown that in the seas, rivers, lakes, the discovery of incomparably different world studies is possible.
  And the most important thing is that during the underwater works, such artifacts are found, which can be removed only from the water.
  According to underwater archaeologists from different countries, the most interesting are the submerged merchant warships.
 In ancient times, in the Middle Ages, in modern times, shipwrecks were common.
  Throughout the history of American Terrier navigation, the number of ships that have found themselves at the bottom of the oceans for various reasons is about one million.
  From the beginning of the 20th century to the present day, on average, about 400 ships have sunk every day, and people have been sailing for more than 2,000 years.
  One can assume that there is a submerged ship every 40 km2.
  During the last half century, dozens of ships from different eras have been discovered, museums or submerged in the Mediterranean Sea.
  In 1958-1969, the Bodrum Museum of Underwater Archeology was established as a result of underwater excavations in the coastal city of Bodrum, Turkey, where a variety of artifacts have been exhibited.
The museum is unique in Europe.
  Dozens of submarines were discovered by Jacques Yves Cousteau's expeditions off the coast of Spain, France, Italy, Sicily, Corsica and Sardinia.
  Any submarine is of great value not only to historians but also to those who deal with navigation, shipbuilding, and international relations at various stages of human development.
Ships represent a system of historical monuments that characterizes an entire era.
  These ships are not completely looted by humans.
  Sunken towns and settlements can be used for submarine archeology from submerged ships.
  The reasons for being submerged are many With the upgrade, marine trade is submerged in the Mediterranean. Earthquake tectonic changes caused by volcanic activity, devastating earthquakes, rising global ocean levels.
  We need a full-length study of the water, as the warships of Cilician Armenia sailed right here.
  From 1931 to 1934, the French explored the Phoenician port of Tire.
 Some time later, Honore Frost conducted a similar study on the shores of the Eastern Mediterranean, in particular, he studied Tire, Sidon, Atlita, and Caesarea.
But one of the most important achievements in underwater archeology was the special scale developed by Lieutenant Jean Alin's divers, which enabled him to perform a series of short dives, during which nitrogen could not be absorbed into the bloodstream.
  Diving on this scale made it possible to save time "forces", most importantly, increase the safety of work several times.
One of the professional divers had died of caesone disease.
  No one was injured during the 1948 operation, and only one diver had to be placed in a compression chamber.
Institutes These many other incidents show that there is a deep connection between diving and 'underwater archeology'.
  Diving can provide literate underwater work; develop multiple methods for literate diving.
  There are underwater (marine) research organizations in the world today, the most well-known being the Woods Hole OceanographicInstitution at the US National Academy of Sciences (NAS) [15], Thethe Environment at the University of Texas [13], Center for Underwater Research, MA (Austrian Research) Camille Jullian Center, University of Provence (France), Barcelona University (Spain), Norwegian University of Science and Technology (Norway).
Many skills are needed today for underwater research, especially since each water basin has its own unique features և The archaeologist must be aware of all these methods և apply them when performing these life-threatening tasks.
In addition to the development and application of the methodology, there are a number of legal issues, in particular the provision of an open form by the government for underwater research.
 If any important part has been discovered - a building, a ship, etc., according to what legal principles will it be protected by the state?
  Today, we can say that, having the Shaniavazan և Akhuryan Reservoir, at the bottom of which there are a number of monuments, we feel the need to develop the relevant legal field.
Archeology in Armenia, but underwater studies, taking into account the depth of this extensive topic, the urgency of what is being conducted in the Republic of Armenia, we have also proposed a master's thesis 3, in which a detailed study has been carried out.
  The student dives into a series of discoveries many times, which due to the poor development of this field, cannot be studied in detail by Armenian archaeologists.
  The student has made many dives in the Red, Mediterranean Seas, Lake Van, as a result of these dives a number of reports-programs have been prepared, a master's thesis has been written under the guidance, which has passed brilliant defense և defense.
  The work of the master in the archives is remarkable.
  He studied many sources in the Matenadaran after Mashtots in Vienna, Mkhitaryans, trying to present 3 Masters: Anna Martikyan.
Medieval origins of underwater archeology in Armenia.
One of the important issues of the study is the detection of rafts, ships that sank during the battles in Sjan և Vanalj, the analysis of the activity of the affiliated organizations.
UNESCO [17] Conclusion of the Archaeological Development referred to in the Convention.
  Thus, based on the need in Armenia, underwater special offers to historians of archeology, teaching, culturologists, archaeologists, especially students of faculties related to tourism.
