The various directions, currents, currents, and theories and systems developed by them throughout the history of philosophy were intended not only to resolve the contradictions and problems of thought arising from a given system of knowledge or period, but also to fulfill one of the fundamental and problematic missions of human thought.
The philosophical meaning is the inclusion of the processes, events, and phenomena recorded in the subjective "objective images" of the world as a result of human-world interaction, which existed throughout the development of philosophical thought from the simple to the materialistic, from the materialistic to the materialistic. In the context of scientific knowledge, philibilistic. And here is the experimental science, which in the framework of the given discussion is interested in the maximum understanding, being defined as a set of research processes of scientific hypotheses or theories by already known facts, facts, facts, research.has always been an integral part of the function of philosophy.
Expression of meaning 1:
the end of the approach և [1].
Throughout the history of philosophical meaning, the object of philosophical meaning has changed throughout the history of philosophical meaning, gaining an ontological basis from the human mental-empirical experience of the time, as well as the "tools" for interpreting the object by giving and receiving.
  Based solely on theoretical experience, there may be fears of the development of systems of systems of abstracted, unrealistic mental structures, which may serve as a basis for the emergence of currents of purely speculative and mental observation.
  However, such tendencies have always been present throughout the history of philosophy on the basis of experimental "objective-based observations." Hetherington S. Fallibilism // The Internet Encyclopedia Philosophy. ISSN 2161-0002.
The target of criticism of philosophies in the person of Immanuel Kant, gradually becoming less competitive or generally pushed off the stage of world philosophy.
At the same time, in the context of the problem of philosophical reasoning, the data of the experimental science of the time were not only pushed out of the "subject list" of philosophical observation, but also became one of the cornerstones determining the further development of philosophy of human thought.
Thus, in the 2nd century, the geocentric model of the universe proposed by Claudius Ptolemy, which corresponded to the results of simple and direct observations from Earth, corresponded to the ideas of man of that period, both secular and spiritual.
 The rotation and ideal rotation of the celestial bodies, the Earth being at the center of the universe, were acceptable to the church, although a number of other self-evident problems arose from such a model until the 16th century.
  However, it was in this region that the German astronomer Nikolai Copernicus came up with the Ptolemaic geocentric model of the universe. He proposed a much simpler model, according to which the Sun is at the center of the cosmos and the Earth revolves around it with the other planets.
  Such a bold move against the Church's dominant ideas could not be immediately accepted, especially since the trajectories of the Copernican model of the celestial bodies did not correspond to the direct observations made from Earth.
However, later, in 1609, when Galileo Galilei's celestial observations showed that there were other orbits around Jupiter, and Kepler recorded that the orbits were not circular but elliptical, Copernicus' solar model based on accurate observations.
Copernicus' model for describing the structure of the universe, thus gradually substantiating itself, soon became an alternative to the Ptolemaic model, which not only changed the notion of celestial physical reality, the process of world order կարգ became a worldview, but also a worldview. paradigm [5].
became the scientific basis of the revolution. In the context of the problem of philosophical meaning, the results of experimental science և its philosophical commentary and meaning are another example of the German classical philosophy's Immanuel Kantikosmogonian hypothesis.
Kant's cosmological hypothesis is significantly closer to modern theories and models of the formation of the solar system.
  According to Kant, the formation of the universe is based on the internal interaction of a huge "cloud" of primary material particles.
As early as Kant, Newton's laws of universal gravitation of mechanics were known, which became the empirical basis for the formation of the Kant of space, where various cosmic bodies arise by the interaction of repulsive and gravitational forces of particles.
  It is difficult to note that the Kantian interpretation of the formation of the universe refers exclusively to processes taking place at the physical level, within which the interactions and possible forms of generalization are mechanical in nature, from the understanding of time to the description of physical reality.
The philosophical interpretation of the theory of classical mechanics was of cosmogonic importance for a number of other issues, which have both direct and mediated similarities with the theories and hypotheses discussed above.
 Kant's hypothesis first of all allows us to speak of the cosmos as a reality with a material origin, where the laws of physical processes of the material world are not only necessary for the emergence of physical reality, but also for a sufficient explanation of the order of the universe.
  Hence, it follows that in the process of the creation of the universe from the raw material, the need for other reasons can be ruled out in principle.
  On this occasion, Kant notes: "Give me matter, I will build the world from it" [6, p. 123].
 This interpretation of Kantian continues in a peculiar way from the observations of the science ի of that general human tendencies's philosophy տվյալ of philosophy.
In particular, later in the 19th century, Charles Darwin's theory of evolution revolutionized biology, offering a fundamentally new understanding and view of the evolution of species and biological systems.
 According to Darwin, in the process of generational change of biological diversity, each subsequent generation acquires the general qualitative characteristics, traits and characteristics of the previous generation, but in each subsequent generation they are not transmitted in exactly the same way, but can occur in the form of mutations.
  The process of transition from simple to complex species takes place through a number of other processes that are essential to evolution: natural selection, the struggle for character randomness, and qualitative change.
  According to Darvinyan, mutations are inexplicable processes, the existence of which even the scientist often tried to explain by looking for the existence of a miracle or god in biological processes.
  However, immediately after the formation of the theory of evolution, the problem of philosophical understanding and interpretation of the results of the empirical research carried out in the framework of the theory became very urgent, with mutations being interpreted by thinkers of the time, which in many cases predetermined the development of science.
Unlike Darwin, Bergson's interpretation of the theory of evolution is significant in this context in the context of the problem of philosophical understanding.
The French philosopher Henri Bergson views the natural, evolutionary process as a creative force underlying the world աշխարհի progress և development, which is defined by the latter as a vital burst.
  According to Bergson, the living world, in the form of biodiversity, the processes that take place in it, differs from the inanimate, material world in that living individuals at the biological level are endowed with a unique life force that makes their existence possible.
  It is due to this natural force that there is a constant development in orphanage, a constant process of emerging from simpler eggs to more complex ones.
  Bergson's interpretation of biology not only contained solutions to obstacles not overcome by previous theories, but also paved the way for a reinterpretation of evolutionary theory's problems directly related to the late Wiesbergian interpretation, in particular, causality.
The main questions of the problem of the possibility of the formation of structures are whether the theories of the description of the formations of the levels lead in principle to the theories of the description of the simplest levels of reality, or whether the biological world can be explained by the laws of material reality.
  Before the advent of Bergson's theory of evolution, the problem of causality had a clear answer, based on Newtonian classical mechanics of dominance in the 17th and 19th centuries.
  According to classical mechanics, the forces acting on the cause-effect formation in reality և in the latter case are strictly unambiguous in principle.
 This view, dubbed determinism, implies that in reality it is possible to predict if the initial state of the process is known.
  Contrary to the prevailing notions, Darwin և then Bergson thought that in reality there are processes that are random in nature և can not be unequivocally determined.
 As a result of the philosophical understanding of the arguments arising from classical mechanics from evolutionist theory and Drabergson's interpretation, it becomes clear that determinism is not the only way to develop events, gradually becoming the opposite of the so-called cause of causality.
  As for the problem of causality, in this case it turns out that in the biological reality there are processes that are not fundamentally predictable պատահ random, which means that the basic laws of physical physics can not be applied to biological systems as they are in the physical world.
  Subsequently, more sophisticated biological theories cannot in principle be deduced from theories for the description of simpler systems [10, p. 123].
The achievements and discoveries of the experimental science of the 20th-21st centuries in the basic problems of indeterminism description systems have left their irreversible trace both on the modern scientific picture of the world and on the foundation of modern philosophy.
  The role of theories that have left their fundamental impact and trace in the modern scientific picture of the world, in particular the experiments carried out within the framework of quantum mechanics of relativity, their philosophical interpretation and meaning in the formation of the current scientific picture of the world.
  However, taking into account the large-scale nature of the discussions on the above-mentioned theories և their general theory ՝, the further discussion will consider the resonance of the 20th-21st centuries ունեցող significant scientific and philosophical achievements's meaning of meaning.
Thus, the studies of the alien cosmos, due to the unprecedented success of the 20th century scientific-technical and experimental science, reached a qualitatively new level.
  In 1929, Edwin Hubble's observations showed that distant galaxies in space, no matter where they are, are not static; they leave us (the observer from Earth) at a very high speed.
  Based on the observations made, Hubble's law was the first fact proposed by empirical and experimental science that the universe is expanding [4, p. 15].
  From the point of view of philosophical understanding, such experimental data have a special significance.
  If galaxies are constantly moving away from each other - this is the result of the expansion of the universe, then at some point in the equator, there was a state from which the universe expanded.
  The moment in science, conventionally called the "Big Bang", is considered to be the zero point that made the universe possible and became the ontological starting point of the latter.
  Such a view is now accepted by the wider scientific community, enshrining the replacement of the static universe paradigm with a dynamically emerging cosmological paradigm before the 20th century.
  Of course, before Hubble, in the history of philosophy, science also addressed the issue under discussion, in the person of Kant, who believed that the question of the origin of the universe contained a contradiction of thought, while at the same time having a thesis-antithesis, it was impossible to answer the problem rationally.
  Meanwhile, the situation changed as a result of understanding the results of experimental science in a new light, which paved the way for understanding the qualitative and quantitative nature of the universe.
The observations made by the eponymous telescope of the same name shortly after the formation of the model of the expanding universe gave rise to the "matter" of the universe 2
  Fundamental and fundamentally new ideas about the structure.
  According to Planck Telescope observations, "ordinary" camping material, made up of stars, galaxies, dense intergalactic dust, and any other outer surface of material reality, makes up only 4.9% of the "matter" of the entire universe.
 The rest of the universe is made up of so-called dark matter և dark energy, with 26.8% և 68.3%, respectively.
Dark matter and dark energy cannot be detected directly experimentally, but we learn about them as a result of gravitational interactions with ordinary matter.
 Thus, the remaining 95.1% of the universe is directly beyond the misconceptions about alien reality and all possible direct observations that have been made so far throughout human history.
It becomes clear from the above discussion that the reality as such is not homogeneous, it consists of different manifestations of the material.
Therefore, when talking about our reality and the universe in general, it would be incorrect to use the meanings of the concept that have prevailed in the whole history of naive materialism, since the whole history of philosophy, and it can cause misunderstanding.
  The development of science and the philosophical meaning of the results developed not only implies changes in the scientific image of the world and its elements, but also in the process of changing the conceptual apparatus, which was specific to both philosophy and science in the development of human thought.
  And today, as a result of the discovery and new achievements of experimental science in the 21st century, the concept of "matter" appears in greater numbers. It has been used here to give a more objective picture of the qualitative-quantitative characteristics of the universe, where the concept of "matter" is needed. to understand all the possible material manifestations that make up the universe in general.
Unseen and fundamentally new realities in the form of a catastrophic event, when for the first time in the world a child is born with artificial intervention at the genetic level, it is necessary not only to perform an objective philosophical understanding of such realities, but also to re-perceive them.
Thus, in general, it should be noted that the problem of the interpretation of experimental science does not lose its relevance and the inalienable need for the interpretation of the experimental activity of science, the elaboration of the meaning by the narration.
Moreover, the experimental data of the new, especially the modern science, are less comprehensible and are often left out of the discourses on various philosophical issues.
  Therefore, in order to prevent such tendencies of the empirical results of experimental science, it is necessary to emphasize the role of philosophical meaning in addition to their possible interpretations.
