The first volume of the "Eminian Ethnographic Collection" [5] summarizes the ethnographic materials called "Crumbs from the Shirak Barns", the tales written in 1880 by "Alexander of Africa, a native of Alexandropol" [5, VIII].
 According to the editorial staff of the collection, in addition to the interest in "folklore", it is noticeable that "new linguistic significance is literally explored in dialectal terms from the point of view of study" [3, X]. ].
  Reading Shirak series of studies, we found that the words that are typical only of the Carno dialect, but they are common linguistic units, which are used in their different expressions in Shirak tales, should not be studied separately.
Aiming to identify the dialects of the Carno dialect, typical of the Shirak dialect, to study them by a comparative-comparative methodology.
The phonological and phonological features of the Carno dialect of linguistic relations were examined by H. By Mkrtchyan [5].
  In this work, special attention has been paid to the word units of Carno dialect, typical of the words of the Shirak dialect, which we will classify according to the idiom, in parallel examining the peculiarities of their composition and connection, as both meanings are necessary to clarify the meanings of these words.
are 1. The Iranshgoyans are presented with typical connections, such as "chali-chrt" 1. Shrub, crooked, woody.
2. Worn items "[5, D, 368] is used as a supplement to the" top "of the intransitive sex, which in one case may be" sold ", in the other case" burned ", for example: "He would bring the top of the flight to the city, which would sell, and which would burn down the house." [5,22].
  The dialectological dictionaries used in fairy tales are not proven, as is the noun hatahut, meaning "noise, shouting". The latter is used as a rule by a practical syllable, as a decisive complement to the wedding noun, for example, Hatahutov had a bridal wedding [5, 49].
The word "carrot" meaning "carrot" is a borrowing-plant name, which is used in the dialects of Karno dialect in the na-parchulukh version.
  It is found in Haberman's fairy tale: "There is, why not, how much writing do you want?" [5, 33].
dialects seriesDurkearkhanay 1 place, the first component of a complex noun, composed of the word durgal "carpenter" common in dialects [6, 1, 362].
 A typical modified version of Shirak's dialect is the dukar, from which the word composition was formed, used in the fairy tale "The King's Small Boy" as a placeholder of one of the components of multiple rectangles, for example: El bazazi dukyan, mikita, frunayr, damrchards, , 69].
 In this row, the naval lattice composition stands out in the same way.
  In the dialects, the Shirak version of the word damirchi, which means "blacksmith", is the damrchi [6, A, 304], by which the composition with a toponymic suffix is ​​also evidenced in dictionaries.
In the Western dialects, the noun filik "A kind of goat with fine and long hair" [6, E, 194] is used in the Shirak dialect without a suffix, for example, This fur is like marifatun, which, he said, builds a palace from flesh bone, chamchor they all eat light [5, 53].
Giving forty elephants, they came down from the mountains and fell on the ponds [5, 55].
 Thus the noun nafiliz irshish, apparently meaning "rod" in Habrman's tale, is used as a result of transformation, for example, Habrman was immediately turned into a thin sprout by a woman, and he himself became a snake, clung to that sprout and bowed [5].
In this line, the noun ghullughtar's personality stands out, formed by the template "ghullugh (service) + tar", which was used to express the fish sent by the king to the queen [5, 6] in the sense of "messenger".
 It is interesting that G. plural G. Jahukyan does not consider the Karno dialect a specialty, which, however, has been noticed by specialists and has been recorded in further studies [3, 20].
Verbs with Carnot-like suffixes, such as to manage the composition, where the energetic syllable, by receiving a causal suffix, expresses the meaning of the reflexive action, for example,… used in dialect 1 In the collection there are դասclassical և dialect orthographic formations, which we have copied identically.
Let him give me a handful of gold, it was enough. I ruled over the gift [5,16].
The mentioned sentence is one of the repetitive expressions in the fairy tale "Baghdavor boy", which, however, is expressed in the next connection ես. I covered my head with the synonym [5,17], meaning "to see the scalp".
 By the way, the mentioned phrase is not presented in the dictionary, և during our search we did not find it in the tales written in other dialects either, so we can state with reservation that it is also one of the expressions typical of the Carno dialect.
  It is typical of the Shirak dialect to manage the composition with the verb suffix in the sense of "coming down". I will give him all your share [5, 4].
  As in the case of Shirak fairy tales, the meaning of the magical spirit is specific to the nouns beginning with the sound-letter f, and the fluttering action is specific to the magical "charkhs" (wheel rotating around the axis), for example, they made silver charkhs out of a brother's head, and those charkhs flew. they cut [5, 58].
to root.
In the fairy tales, the typically used peltkstal Shirak's verb is a variant of the verb "to shine, shine" in the sense of "branching, shining", especially in the dialects, as compared to the one in the fairy tale "from the son of Shachi Shabur". It was so monstrous that it shone like the sun [5, 51].
2. Adjectives typical of the Shirak dialect express both direct and impersonal nouns, appearing in the syntactic positions of determiner or signifier, as the sharp notion in the fairy tale "From the son of Auchi Shabur" is characterized by the zilfikhar loanword meaning "egg-shaped". [2, 312], for example,… .said the son of Shabur of Awji and drew his zilfikhar sword, reached [5,58].
  A dialectal feature is the naածve, which in the fable "The Cat and the Lion" describes the woody, for example, then picking up a thick stick and falling on the lion ջ 5 [5,80].
  In the Carno dialect, the adjective suffix is ​​used to mean "terrible, frightening" [6, A, 34], for example, the places that came down were very dangerous [5, 39].
Saymaz The adjective "Stupid, foolish" is used to describe ingenious but not understood by the boys [6, E, 261], for example, "Take that Saymaz boy by the head" [5, 10].
The adjectives also have compounds that are not represented in the dictionaries.
  Many of them are met in fairy tales by commentators.
  It seems that realizing the circumstance of their applications, the narrator presents the explanation of eczema in parallel.
With the adjective "human-like fish", the boy's personal noun was described, the hunter commented with the phrase "he did not know anything". McClellan did not know anything at all [5, 39].
The dictionaries also do not present a number of phonetic variants, such as the razor's razor's [6, A, 22]'s razor's egg, which was used in the adjective "sharp" in the fairy tale "From the son of Auchi Shabur", for example, , 58].
3. The adverb of the past tense, "The day after, the future, the future" is the connection with the times of aparnicism, for example,….
[6, A, 375]'s grammatical literal "'s meaningful, special, to which the re-interpreted Shirak's dialect is also characterized by a number of phrases, which are basic phrases attributed to personal nouns, for example, to become stunned" To be surprised G, 71] describes the king's decree in the fairy tale: "When Ranchpar learned this, he was struck by lightning [" [5: 4].
Dart was "blue from the ranch boy". The phrase "The goal was to change" [6, A, 315] was used in the fairy tale "From the ranch boy": "Now the pain in his stomach was different - the dart was blue" [5: 3].
In fairy tales, the circumstance of explaining a phrase with a phrase is interesting, as a result of which synonyms are used, making the word more vivid and understandable.
Phrases with the component ar are numerous in dialects, which are mainly connected with the beautiful, the enlightened, the death of life, for example, ar, do, pass, eyes, take, height, take out, etc. [6, A, 123].
  However, the phrase "fill with arderdik" is not evidenced in dictionaries, it was used in the fairy tale "Ranchpar's son" with the meaning of "what happened", as well as "what good is it?" Ar's arderdik was full, he was born [5,10].
  There are many phrases with a water component, from which the stable expression of a water mill used in the same fairy tale with the meaning of "to be" is not proved, for example, they saw the other forty water mills being milled with water [5, 15].
  In this series, the phrase used in the fairy tale "Baghdavor boy" stands out: to remain as a frozen person with those who have a commentary [5, 21].
to greet the kings of the Armenian expressions.
 The phrase "tamallah" meaning "to greet" is not proven in dictionaries. It was used in the fairy tale "From the Ranch Dance Boy", just as the vow from the Ranch Dance Boy was made by Teghtamallah [5: 7].
Unsubstantiated borrowings are understandable in speech, just as the word "tavargh" means "bored". [5,15].
 Umuz means "shoulder" "Umuzin lied to the fur and happily fell on the road and went home" [5, 51].
 Artgh means "in turn", for example, the boy told artgh [5, 51].
Dialect words, belonging to different parts of speech, have different word-formation expressions, in which word expressions have their own manifestations. Suffixes, often with interrupted foreign languages.
Studying the folk semantics of the lexical units of fairy tales in the clarification of thinking in folk works.
  Examining the dialect words, we encountered difficulties, because a large group of words became hidden in the dialect dictionaries, it is not often recorded, it needs coverage.
  Therefore, we suggest that specialists in the field of Armenian dialect undertake this grateful work.
