From the points of view of archeology H. The study of Tumanyan's works gives the literary critic opportunities to discover new, remarkable features in them.
  We were one of the first to try to study the literature of our "genius" using the knowledge of the "Genius" in our other two [7], [8] հոդված articles.
  Turning to a series of works that can be expressed in the original material at the mentioned times, let us first say that we consider the archetype of the poet, which is already in the domain of the collective "collective consciousness" (K. Jung), as outside the "figure of the subject of the creative process".
  At different stages of the development of world literature, writers create literary characters with different, invariant (variant variant) incarnations of the poet's archetype.
  The image of a creative individual (poet) was created "in mythology (for example, the image of the poet Tsergich Orpheus in Greek mythology)," in works written in the genres of three genres.
  In the works of the identifiers, the personality of the artist, in its turn, naturally, with the artistic "Already one author in the most diverse formations.
in the work, - writes A. Bolshakova - the "archetype" (a general concept as an artistic conceptual form-G.Kh.) in foreign studies.
  That is why its study must always take into account that prospect or horizon, its possible expansion ”[14,49].
  According to that, the great poets in the lyrical works, in the works considered as software, in fact, create a mythical image of the poet, which is accepted to be called a lyrical hero.
  They sometimes directly create literary characters of the writer, artist or actors, through which they present their ideas about the person who creates them, as if in a certain historical-social environment, a personality endowed with certain moral and psychological features.
In particular, the manifestations of the poet's archetype through the lyrical hero, literary characters, as well as the unique artistic expressions of other archetypes are observable. In Tumanyan's works.
  They can be studied with the aim of revealing the essential features of the poet / poet in order to reveal the literary image of the person who created the eight-luminous imagination (lyrical hero).
Tumanyan introduces to the reader "his lyrical-poetically" meaningful quartets; In the lyrical-historical poem "Taking Tmkaberd" (1905).
  The literary critic S. Melkonyan tried to substantiate that the great poet created the literary genre "the quartet as a lyrical poem" with quatrains [10,128], where he called the lyrical hero, who is the poet himself, a "literary cultivator" in his study.
 Before H. None of the Armenian poets, Tumanyan, paid as much attention to the direction of embodying and discovering the poet's destiny as he did.
 Such thinking, of course, was conditioned not only by Tumanyan's concerns about making the Armenian writer in the national and public life artistically visible and debatable, but also by the need to address aesthetic issues.
From the point of view of the study of "The Poet and the Musa", it becomes apparent in the manifestation of a remarkable feature of the archetypes in the characters of the Poet and the Musa, which is necessary to be.
  Like many archetypes, the poetic archetype, in turn, is binary in nature, that is, it has an internal unity of opposite sides of the same.
It is a personal expression, due to the interpretation of which it becomes possible to make visible the vital truth with its internal contradictions, complex realities, in which in this case the "Poet and Musa" appears is close to the type of truly dramatic poem, mainly due to being written with a dialogue of heroes.
  And even though the actors in the dialogue, the Poet ան Musa, are presented in sharp contrast, they are not two opposing characters, but the poet of the same image, the poet of the Poet's dual alliance.
The material state is an expression of a business-like, incapable environmental state within the life experience of a character.
The image of the poet expresses the situation of a real poet in a social environment consisting of rude, mostly self-interested individuals, where he constantly encounters people who cannot appreciate high lyric poetry.
  The poem, in fact, is a variant expression of the poet և's real poetic understanding of the conflict's representation of the catapult motive, which was artistically depicted by the author in the realm of Armenian reality.
  In the image of a poet, he was presented with the greatest difficulty in the midst of people who take care of his family's needs, are creative, and think mostly about making money.
  The real poet, who finds himself in such a state, who is depicted in the poem through satire, sings the praises of a purse that ends in a moment of despair and depression.
  In Musa's poem, he is the embodiment of the noble and noble aspirations that gave the poets inspiration, which was the embodiment of the poet's inner convictions. Now there is a situation when that connection has weakened under the pressure of reality.
  Due to everyday circumstances, as well as being written through satire, the poet found himself in the heroic status of a poet called to inspire people, praising the purse of money.
 At the end of the poem, Musa's words condemning Poetin should be understood as heroic irony. Deh, typical of ideals, stay well, heartless, unjust, I have been doing this to you for so many years, you have denied everything, you have become a money-lover….
After arguing with each other in the artistic sphere of the poem, they split up, each remaining in his conviction.
It is noteworthy that the author introduced these two actors from a point of view with realistic approaches.
  We are generally interested in the topic of the topic. Jrbashyan's commentary on the poet և Musa's characters as literary heroes who are the antithesis of a creative individual [11,252].
  Only from the point of view of the peculiarities of the Poetry-archetype do we think that their literary analysis makes the idea of ​​the unity of the Poet and Musa more grounded?
  This is evidenced by the fact that in Tumanyan's initial idea they finally reconciled in their own way.
  This fact is confirmed by the fact that before making the poem final, Tumanyan wrote a metaphor, which he did not include in the canonical text.
 Here he wanted to mention that all this is a joke, եղծ the poet continues to be faithful to the noble public title.
 And here is Musa. Crying, he turned his right hand towards me, But suddenly from the touch of his right hand, I forgot myself, I lost consciousness, The song of the song burned again, My heart caught fire again, And I remained a poet again, Again close-captive Musa, To dedicate songs to the Armenians again.
The above-mentioned part of the ideals of the artist-poet affirmation in Tumanyan մտ մտ's ideas Պ Պ ղ Պ Թ Թ Թ Թ Թ Թ Թ։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
  That unity, at the level of satirical aesthetics, was separated in the form of Poet and Musa, but continued, in fact, to maintain its unique integrity.
  Such an approach testifies to the writer's self-conceivable idea of ​​presenting the unchanging essence of the poetic archetype in a new way, in an invariant-ive expression, in a binary, two-dimensional way.
    In addition, the following testifies to the poet Պ Musa's unity.
  According to experts, according to K. Jung is an expression of the manifestation of the psychoanalytic beginning of the man in the theory of archetypes. The anima archetype is an expression of the existence of the tendency to appreciate art, the perception of beauty.
 As is well known, in Greek mythology the muses were the daughters of Zs, charming girls who inspired writers.
 This circumstance in a unique way confirms the unity of the characters of the Poet and Musa in the field of artistic connection of this poem.
  According to the artist-poet, this poem is an exceptional artistic expression of the relationship between reality and both in Tumanyan's work and in Armenian poetry.
The poet's archetype was expressed in unique versions in Tumanyan's poem "Tmkaberd Arum", which has already been created as a song invented by an ashugh-poet.
 It is known that the poet even had the subtitle "Ashugh's Conversation", which was later removed by the poet.
  Ter-Tumanyan meant the circumstance of his artistic thinking with the moral ideas of the people.
  In addition, Tumanyan, in his article "The Character of Sayat-Nova Songs", emphasized the common understanding of the unity of the ashugh-poet in the Eastern countries. "An ashugh who, in the East, very wisely means 'poet', 'lover' at the same time," he writes.
  In other words, Tumanyan did not consider the creative talent of the troubadour a low-level ability, but equated it with the gift of an erisk poet.
  What is particularly interesting here from the point of view of differentiating the poet's archetype is the moral and psychological characteristics of the two troubadours representing the poem, the folk singer troubadour և Nadir Shah's palace troubadour dancers, and the meaning of their attitude to what happened.
  In other words, when looking at their characters in relation to the "subject of the creative process", the indifference and moral nature of the poem's events towards the actors, as if they were creative individuals, become more visible.
  It is obvious that the image of the troubadour presenting the poem is endowed with the characteristics of a singer related to the interests of the people.
  He even spoke under the name of Malul, who speaks in front of the people, being a profound, creative work, in the script version of the poem.
The troubadour representing the story of the poem is convinced that he provides the hearers with high moral values, moral messages.
  The ideas expressed about immortality by a good deed, cursing even an evil relative, and appreciating the accomplishment of such a person, even though considered an enemy, praising the ideal of an innocent person, have been instilled and spread among the people through centuries of national and universal experience.
 The glorification of these thoughts through an artistically simple and memorable word accessible to a wide audience. How to love and rejoice, Beauty, treasure and throne, Death is ours, we are death, Man's work is always immortal.
… ..Evil also always lives immortal. Curse on his evil deed, be it your son or your father and us, or the woman you love with Muraz.
I say the word of kindness, Who smiles in our hearts, Who does not love, even the enemy, The good deed, the good man ”[4: 47-48].
In order to confirm his words in the context of the poem, he describes the heroic struggle of Tatul, the prince of Tmuk fortress, and his soldiers against a powerful enemy, praises the beauty of Tmka, Tatul's love for women, which overwhelms him with invincible power.
  Tells about the betrayal of Tmkatiru, tempted by the prospect of becoming a queen due to the song of the troubadour sent by Nadir Shah, the fall of the fortress, the destruction of Tatul's knights, the execution of a unique beauty by the Shah, thus praising the idea of ​​immortality of a good wife.
  As a result of all this, the troubadour expresses the ideal image of himself and the author about an innocent person. We pass by, only the immortal. The good and the bad are spoken. Ah, blessed is he who comes and goes unharmed.
From the point of view of the topic we are interested in in the dramatic and tragic actions of the poem, the image of Nadir Shahipalat ashugh is remarkable.
  It comes to our attention as a result of studying the above-mentioned patterns of expression of the poet's archetype in the literature.
 The Tumanyan scholars (L. Hakhverdyan [9, 343], E. Jrbashyan [11,368], H. Tamrazyan [2,287]) strongly emphasize the role of this troubadour, noting only that he is just a participant in Nadir's martyrdom, with his song a tempting offer to Tmka. - a powerful masterpiece.
  We want to present in more detail his image, the moral description, as a literary version of the troubadour.
  The palace troubadour, with conviction, is presented in the framework of a two-sided depiction of the poet's archetype, in a certain contrast with the troubadour poet narrating the poem.
 If the latter is a singer devoted to the interests of the people ևExpresses high moral standards close to his ideas, praises man from those points of view, the apolitical ashugh appears in the poem as an ashugh-poet fulfilling the whims of his master, Nadirshah, who becomes a member of the stronghold of Tatul պաշտպան a way to fall into the trap he set with the interests of the Shah.
The author of the poem, in fact, does not describe him in a negative sense.
  On the contrary, he was presented as the "charming" singer of the Shah ("And the Shah sent his charming singer" [4, 51]).
 The fact that the court ashugh disguised himself as a poor wandering ashugh at Tmkaberdgalis testifies to his participation in the conspiracy.
At the same time, the organizers of the ambush against the defenders of the castle use the special selfless love and warm attitude towards the people who are loved, respected and honored by the profession of troubadour. "The king did not enter with a happy fight, // Ghonagh is the ashugh with his saz. // Eve one day old, wandering // A poor troubadour entered Temkaberd ”[4, 51].
In connection with the stern description of the stingy descriptions of this troubadour, it must be said that we mean that the high-quality literary work always contains more than is presented in the text.
  In connection with such an approach, literary critic H. Edoyan writes. "As a result of artistic information, it is deeper, bigger than the thought that the author wanted to express" [1, 363].
  And here the author, in the person of Nadir Shah's court troubadour, depicts a version of the poet's archetypal image, which, in the service of its dictator, in turn betrays the title of noble and high-ranking artist, in the presence of a performance song. promoter-participant in the case.
Do you hear her, beautiful lady, O incomparable Nazan? Look at Shah, his army, the Lord of the world is infinite նա He is a weak man like us, he is always a captive of the beauties. Your crown is worthy of a crown. queen….
Let us pay attention to the difference between the moral aspirations and attitudes towards Tmkatiruhi, the ashugh representing the content of this transformed palace court աշ poem.
  The latter, praising the beauty of the prince's wife, praises the love for her for Tatul, who is fighting against a powerful enemy, in the role of the greatest enthusiasm and zeal brought by that love in the continuous victory of the enemy. "He is the soul of Prince Tatul, // The giant is drunk with his love, // His smile gives courage, // That the field descends like a lion."
  Meanwhile, the court ashugh, praising the mistress Tmka, wants to divide the prince և's wife և. provoking the latter's celebration, she incites her husband to defend the homeland with her brave soldiers, which։ happens.
 He uses his creative talent, the ability of a charming singer to do evil by doing the will of his dictator.
 Finally, it can be said that in the person of Nadir Shah's henchman's henchman, Tumanyan quite vividly presented such a representative image of a dangerous and harmful representative of the poet, who became really "money-loving" and had creative abilities.
  With his negative description he completes the series of literary versions of the poet's archetype in the author's works.
It was the period of Tumanyan's creative maturation and mastery improvement from the beginning of the 1900s.
  The poet creates or processes the works written in the past to a high level.
Most of these best poems, which artistically represent the inner world of the genius poet in a more complete and perfect way, the framework of personal, national, universal and cosmic concerns, interests, ideals.
  The wise Tumanyan quartets were created during this period (since 1916).
Each of them uniquely outlines the lyrical, psychological description of the author as a famous Armenian poet, who creates the version that appears in the literary embodiment of the lyrical hero of the poet-archetype.
Tumanyan's revelations will live with interests.
In them, the literary depiction of the poet-arithmetic poet's archetype gets a new expression of differentiation in the quatrains.
  In the context of Tumanyan's quatrains in the context of the article, the peculiarities of artistic self-revelations about the artist (artist, creative individual), ideas about the originality of his thinking, the content of various literary depictions of the archetype through the aesthetic and philosophical self-philosophical structure of the quartet.
  After all, the author of the quartets considered them the biography of his soul. "Quartets are very strong, they are the biography of my soul," he said.
While pointing to the possibility of multi-layered approaches of the quatrains, while speaking about Ed. Jrbashyan 's analysis from the point of view of thematic grouping, the third group presented its numbering as follows:
  In other words, it is not ruled out that when analyzing the thoughts in the other groups, it may be possible to refer to the relations with the other topics.
As we have already mentioned, linguist and literary critic S. Lori should be singled out among the new studies on the topic of interest to us. Melkonyan's book "The biography of Tumanyan's soul / a quartet as a lyrical poem" [10].
  The author, having in mind Tumanyan's note on the quatrains, as well as the Tumanyan principle in the collection of quatrains published in 1920, has given a new genre description due to insights and a unique approach.
  He considered the whole unity contained in the ideology of that collection as a whole և to present it with a certain genre, that is, "the quartet as a lyrical poem", and the main character as a "literary worker".
 Such an approach, we think, "has a certain basis" logic, insofar as the poet, not noticing the quatrains, proposes to arrange the thematic quatrains, not only the author, but also the lyrical hero, who is a genius poet (which he noted).
To reveal the genius, Tumanyan expressed in the quartets both his personal and social concerns and, which is more important from the point of view of Mertema, embodied aesthetic principles typical of Armenian and creative artists in general.
    Due to all this, the artistic revelations of the genius poet, who became a lyrical hero in a certain large group of quartets, are in a unique relationship with the poet's archetype.
 The lyrical hero of the quartets in Tumanyan's lyric poetry is a variation of the poet's archetype, where the inner world of his great literary personality is revealed through a new, more connected, but wiser, range of interests.
  In other words, using a new literary version of the poet's archetype, he appears as a genius poet, a literary-lyrical hero.
Such an approach had different preconditions.
  It is known that during the writing of the quartets, Tumanyan, with his literary preferences and moods, was inclined towards the literary traditions of the East ("Towards the East, the homeland is my soul").
 The events that took place in the years before the Quartet ությանը in 1915. The Armenian Genocide, the Russian revolutions and civil wars (1917-1920), the loss of some of their relatives (brothers, son)) helped him to consciously think and express himself about the eternal questions of life, the eternal destiny of man, the obvious answers, dreams.
  In our opinion, he considers all this within the framework of a number of other archetypal notions (Divine archetypes, natural-philosophical archetypes: Chaos // Cosmos, etc.).
  And so, the chaos unfolding in the historical and social life caused a certain amount of disappointment in human society and historical progress, which was expressed in the famous quartet as follows: (World War I, 1914, Bloody Mouth Cannibals are idle. In the millennium he barely became a Murderer. He walks bloody with his hands still stubbornly, And far from Man on his way.
Tumanyan reveals the complexities of his existence in the earthly life, the obstacles that do not let him live, enjoying the "peaceful and peaceful" human life with a creative personal destiny.
  Therefore, the poet was dreaming. May there be a far corner, May the child sleep justly, Happy in a dream, Peace and peaceful humanity.
But cruelly, even in real conditions, he felt to be next to people, their heartfelt desire, to be an unstoppable, sincere and passionate desire to be a companion of suffering. I run in vain, I am deceived, I am connected with a thousand, I live with everyone, I suffer as much as everyone.
The generous, open-minded poet even wants to turn the pain and suffering caused by the people around him into incentives to help, support and illuminate their path. How many times have I been burned by my hands, I have been burned and become fire, I have become fire, I have given light, I have been consumed by giving light.
In the ever-changing movement of life, in the midst of injustices, violence, human exploitation by man, the unimaginable evils caused by man, he tries to direct the intelligent creature of darkness to the path of normal life.
  That is why he interpreted the way of life of a person by researching the life experiences of East and West literatures, the combination of philosophers.
  He enriches and delivers them by intertwining them with the philosophy of enjoying earthly life peacefully and living happily. Hey greedy man, hey dissatisfied man, your mind is long, your life is short! How many passed like you, before you, before you. What did they take from life, what do you take with you? Go peacefully, have fun for two days this way.
Orienting people on the road, the poet pointed out that this path leads from caring for humans to a compassionate attitude towards wildlife. One day you hit a crow of life, It flew, it went wounded, It still flies in my mind, bloody and lost.
The transition from caring and caring attitude towards everything and everyone to a delicate approach to life, to every manifestation of life, which deserves the appreciation of love.
  Hence the famous quartet, which was not fully commented on by our literary critics. Khayyam said to his mistress: - Put your foot on the ground carefully, Who knows that you are stepping on the beautiful bee now… Hey, dear, we are also careful Let us pass, who knows whether we are now trampling on the mistress's beak or Khayyam's fiery tongue.
The quartet is not only about the eternal generational change in life (that is, Khayyam and his mistress have arrived, now it's our turn, etc.), but also by repeating and emphasizing the word "careful" more, around people, being sensitive to everyone and everything. the desire to live.
  The idea of ​​living in the life of the universe came from the above-mentioned ideas.
  At the same time, it pushed Tumanyan to look at the man who had shrunk under the pressure of earthly life, shrunk, remained in the poet's cherished circle of interests, to the realm of high human interests, to wide and deep spaces, whose real and imaginary symbol and arena became the poet's space to dream. .
  Uda becomes not only an artistic image and a word of comparison created as a result of a poetic imagination, but also an arena of real interests.
 It is known how much he was interested in the knowledge and ideas gained about the universe during his lifetime.
 1922 Due to the impression he got from the conversation he had with 14-year-old astronomer Victor Hambardzumyan, he wrote the poem "Farewell to Sirius".
  It was first published in "Nork" (1922) magazine with the following note: "Sirius is constantly leaving us at a speed of 2,625,000 times a day.
  It is 144 times larger in volume than 88 times brighter. ”[3,718]
In our opinion, Tumanyan drew the attention of his readers to the measurable and immeasurable, infinite quantities of living cosmic bodies in the life of the universe, Tumanyan to the circumstances that constrain the free activity and thinking of such a person.
He tried to focus man's attention on the problems reaching the cosmic limit, in order to be one of the greatest problems of the rational, reasonable man.
  He emphasized the insignificance of the circumstances surrounding the earthly life, the human mind and the freedom of the human being compared to the cosmic measurements.
  And he sought to observe and appreciate the meaning of earthly existence from the realm of cosmic infinity.
The poet's cosmopolitanism and views on the creator of the universe had unique stimuli.
  The poet, noticeably skeptical of the historical progress of civilization (remember, the thought "man is still far from his way") eventually tended from the earthly man, from the narrow and narrow-minded interests, to the more stable and eternal values ​​of existence.
  The preference for such a contemplation was expressed by the existence of the genius poet-lyrical hero from the very beginning, the man-historical source repeating the eternal source of history.
  Through the above version, which meditated on communicating with the divine archetypes, presenting them with the names of God, Chrysal, Untouchable Min, Creator, You, His, in which Tumanyan saw the cosmic creative spirits, the historical and national and family tragedies. in the spheres of eternal, unchanging psychology, which emerged in prehistoric times in the form of archetypal conditions, states, characters, motives ”[15,570-571].
  Such was the literary version of the archetype of the poet, which was manifested in his poems, the prototype of which was the poet H. Tumanyan is himself.
The poet, who is given to the everyday details of life, pointing to the way of living a cosmic life to a person who has shrunk into the corridor of life, obviously feels in a state of ecstasy. On the one hand, he is tormented by the harsh reality of earthly life, on the other hand, he is drawn to heavenly harmony.
In this existence of the lyrical hero, he is already attracted by the stable resting place of eternal values, which he has preserved in the existence of the psychology of humanity with the ideas of the Divine, Chaos // Cosmos.
  Here the cosmos is presented to him on the edge of high harmony, opposed to the chaos of the earth. To imagine other archetypal couples "to" "ascend" to life. My soul is a divine traveler in the universe. My soul is transcendent from the earth, unacquainted with the glory of the earth. It has departed and disappeared until the stars are far away.
The author then introduces himself in the cosmic dimensions and the one who observes his creative ability in his natural behavior and self-confessions.
  In the expansive flights of his mind, we mentioned the quartets! In general, the lyrical hero condenses in his personality in a unique way, like the features typical of a high-class creator.
  The universe and the inventor, according to Tumanyan, because they are the stimuli for the realization of the greatest creative potential, the apocalyptic creator also tries to merge with all that he has imagined, including the earth and the people created by them. I wish I was with you endlessly - with my life. A thousand shades, alone in the field, I would be with the sky. But who will give the pleasure, I would not feel it myself, And I would melt, expand, be with everyone….
The lyrical hero of the quartets presents himself as the personification of the collective creative potential of the whole humanity, transmitting inexhaustible artistic values ​​to the world.
  As a collective image of the artist-poet, he makes the idea of ​​his creative abilities visible by comparing it with the possibilities of God's incomplete creation.
  Therefore, the lyrical hero feels the need to wait and communicate with the individuals who are endowed with great opportunities to work and generously distribute the fruits of his abilities to people, which is not fully realized. Abundant, individual, like God, I am always tired of being there. My soul is thirsty, I am tired of paying close attention. One must come against me, lavish and extravagant, I am tired of waiting and searching in every way.
forward!
The lyrical hero of high-level interrelationships, however, stands for the poet, as a creative artist, the criterion of the need for the totality of the cosmic eloquence of achieving the whole, the cosmic inclusion that is the result of divine creative creativity.
 It is due to striving for the knowledge of all that that the artist can achieve the full expression and embodiment of the incarnation skills in the work, feeling himself the bearer of the cosmic life, its multifaceted multifaceted manifestations.
Every time you take something from You, Every time I look at how much it's still going on, I wonder, O Shrew, how much you have given me, How much I am still to give you to join us again.
The lyrical hero of the quartets realizes his mental unity with the "great soul of the universe", together with the genius individuals, various talented artists, who appear in the corridor of space time. A thousand years, a thousand centuries ago or back, what is it? I have been, or, I will be forever and ever, what is it that, A thousand of you change your horse, the horse is a passing game, I am always a soul, the great of the universe with the soul, what is that?
The poet lives and passes by his earthly life and destiny.
  Due to his creative activity, he is immortalized in time and space due to his creative activity from the life-giving elements of the ordinary generation.
Just as the idea of ​​a God capable of creating the universe accompanies man forever. but differs in that, eAsi. "It's just the corpse and the name I have…", When Your infinite smile radiated against my soul, - What an unstable corpse and the name you have, You are God, you are groundless, you are anonymous and do it….
The universal creator is represented individually in the notions of the universal good and creative archetypal names of God, as a contrast to the total flight of chaos, disorder, the cosmos, that is, beauty, intelligence, and creative imagination.
 It becomes a supreme being embodying the ideal of the creative principle for the poet, which the high-class poets in general, and in this case especially the genius poet Tumanyan, strive to achieve. principle of harmony.
  He, shining in the worlds of stellar dreams, pure in the distances of the thoughts of the Great Thoughts, delicate in the mists of the Unforgettable Memories. birth and vital complications in the artistic chronotope of this genre (within the space of time).
  As a poet, he owes his birth and endowment, according to his own imagination, to nature and the creative source of everything. The sky at my baptism is the hour, the sun is the chandelier, The rainbow became narot, everyone's love became the pool. The mountain became my godfather, the dew became myrrh alive, And it was he who made me a poet.
The poet wanted to emphasize that his ideas about God or the Creator are broader than the beliefs of the clergy about the Supreme Lord.
 In his opinion, God is the bearer of a free creative principle, not an idol, which is worshiped in the temples built for him. The temples of God are the prison of the multitudes-content in the worlds. It is as if the lord lives there, under the confines of the worshipers.
Of course, he smiles freely everywhere, but you look at the poor man's work and mind.
In our opinion, within the framework of the above-mentioned ideas, Tumanyan constantly felt Chaos in the realm of perceptions of the archetypal couple Cosmos, which was also manifested in his verse works.
  In the face of the harsh, inconsistent reality of the elements, the inspiration of the creative sphere, he considered the effectiveness of his supposedly poetic activity, from which he was dissatisfied.
  The reason was that he felt responsible for the creator who embodied the universal creative principle he imagined. "Kyanksar Square, everyone's footsteps. // Failure, disruption of the supernatural power, fruitless, passed without result.
 // How many flowers should have grown that did not grow on this soil, // What answer should I give to the soil and the one that blooms… ».
The poet has witnessed more coexistence within the chaos and contradictory spheres of public life.
  But in this way, real poets continue to be dreamers, living with the desire to establish the good in life, the beautiful, even when they are surrounded by the chaos of public relations. Sources sound and pass, Thirsts long and pass, And dreaming of happy roots, Poets call and pass.
The poet is no stranger to the ups and downs of life, to be tempted to enjoy life in the circle of obstacles, to enjoy it with a good friend.
  The pleasures of life should be enjoyed within the limits of the possibilities given by reality. This is what you are right to say, bring your bowl, this is what you go for, even in a dream, bring your bowl.
Life flows in space, one lives, the other waits, bring your bowl.
While writing the quatrains, the poet was at the stage of his life when he made inferences about his life and aesthetic ideas, based on the experience of his Zurichs, which have solid foundations to describe the poetic-figurative, ontological features of the poet.
  Such an approach is to have an individual point of view, to have a point of view, to present original approaches, to examine a person with a disinterested, impartial and impartial discretion and to make sense of the poet (artist in general) abilities in his point of view.
 He summarized his thoughts on all this in the following famous quartet. For example, to express: What do you know about the Creator's secrets to anyone? He gave a friend, connected everyone in this world.
In the systems expressed in the quartets.
In his reflections, Tumanyan values ​​the role of the homeland in the context of the cultural achievements of the West and the East, according to the world civilization and cultural poet.
It had its originality and advantages, so he writes: HaymetsanNo bloody disasters, horrible with noises, the slaves of the West avoid the desert of the car, the gold of their souls. Towards the east, the divine-homeland of my soul. It is worth emphasizing that Tumanyan was finally in favor of developing the national culture.
  In this connection, Academician H. Tamrazyan, for example, writes, "World civilization must be viewed in the synthesis of these two," Armenia must also accept "and move forward through this synthesis.
Tumanyan was faithful to those principles "[2,467].
  In one of the quatrains, he already considers himself a poet standing on the national ground, whose gaze and thoughts are focused on the inaccessibility of the universal existence from the earliest beginning, on examining and understanding the deep mystery of its infinity and eternal existence. The ancient world is Armenian and Masis is celestial. My deep soul has spoken to Him at the height - From the immature thing, from the beginning, when they did not exist and did not exist, Until the end, the immortal sleeps for centuries.
Thus, in the works examined in the article, Tumanyan, creating characters, consciously or subconsciously uses the post-archetype archetype և other archetypal notions (divine archetypes, natural-philosophical archetypes) to transcribe the genius poet as a genius poet.
  His above-mentioned poetic thoughts and uniquely portrayed characters, lyrical heroes, wise reflections and confessions become unique aesthetic messages for poets who follow the path of poetry.
in expressions suggested a new literary version.
