Preface.
  Women's crime is an integral part of general crime, but at the same time it is characterized by quantitative and qualitative specific indicators, the characteristics of the person who committed the crime, certain factors that determine the criminal behavior.
Professors P. referred to women's crime. N. Tarnovskaya, N. Zealand, E. Ferrin, W. A. Serebryakova, A. H. Gabuzyan, Yu. Մ. Antonyan, V. V. Lune, S. A. Shotkinov և others.
The aim of the work is to study the peculiarities of women's crime, the identity of the woman who committed the crime, and to present the state of women's crime in the Republic of Armenia in recent years.
Women's crime has not been sufficiently studied in non-patriotic legal literature. There are almost no studies on female crime.
  This testifies to the importance and timeliness of the chosen topic.
In the "Medea" tragedy.
The motivational-specific problems of women's crime were first touched upon by the ancient Greek playwright Euripides (c. 480-406 BC). The work describes the struggle of the main heroine, Medea, in the midst of her motherly hatred for Jason.
 Drowning in jealousy, he kills Jason's wife և children.
  Nar-Dos addressed this topic in the story "What Happened When Two Pieces of Sugar Were Missing from the Sugar Bowl", describing the case of the mother-in-law being married by other members of the family and the latter being killed.
  The woman is described in the crime in Alexandre Dumas' novel "Count MonteCristo", where the royal prosecutor Wilford's wife, Eloise, blindly kills Wilford's mother by poisoning and tries to kill the prosecutor's father.
  Other examples can be found in the pages of world history and literature.
Scientific research on women's crime, its causes, the personality of the woman who committed the crime և The development of measures to prevent women's crime began later, in the early nineteenth century.
  Statist Kettle, living in the age of the emergence of factor theory as a new theory of criminology, studied the statistical patterns of crime and wrote that "the tendency to commit crimes depends on age, sex, profession, level of education, season, etc."
  He viewed the human sex as one of the determinants of crime.
Criminologist Tarnovskaya, who was, in fact, Lombrozo's successor, devoted several works to certain types of perpetrators.
  She argued that the perpetrator differed significantly, both mentally and physically, from the type of average woman in this or that or that environment.
The problem of women crime was addressed by the criminologist Zeland, who was a representative of the theory of morality.
  Assessing women's crime, he assumes that a woman's life is closed և monotonously, summed up by a limited number of identities, and in backward situations can lead to the commission of a crime rather than a multi-faceted life.
The Italian criminologist Ferry, substantiating his view of taking anthropological "social factors" into account, stated that crime is not only related to biological features, but also to both these features and elphysical-social factors.
According to Professor Lune, the moral and legal behavior of women predetermines the behavior of minors and young people.
 The crime of the latter turns into adult delinquency, thus creating favorable conditions for the criminogenic situation in the country.
Professor Ara Gabuzyan mentions that the image of a woman is very important for juvenile socialization.
  From this point of view, the criminal influence of the family is first of all the criminal influence of the other members of the female gender of the family, moreover, it is not the direct influence, but the attitude towards the child, which causes negative emotions.
Thus, the criminal image of a woman can contribute to the commission of a crime by a minor.
 However, this is not unequivocal, as the bad influence of a couple can be a crime if the minor has close emotional ties with the woman.
  And the behavior of the absence of close emotional ties can be anti-criminal for an adult, as the latter will try not to resemble the illegal behavior as much as possible.
 This applies to other family members as well.
There is a stable tendency in the world in the case of illegal crimes. in normal conditions performed by women does not exceed 10-15%.
  If general crime increases, then women's crime increases, but, as a rule, it does not go out of its "share" corridor.
The small proportion of female crime can be explained by the higher moral level of a woman, her biological role, genetic characteristics [8, p. 658].
Weight When talking about women's crime, it is necessary to take into account demographic indicators.
 Women's crime differs from crime in the number of acts committed by men, the nature of criminal behavior, the consequences, the role that a woman plays in a crime, the impact of crime on women's circumstances, and so on.
  This is due to the historically conditioned place of a woman in social relations, her social roles and psycho-physiological features.
Murder of a newborn baby's crime has a special place in the crime of women.
  Such crimes are usually committed by young women who do not have a family, a husband or an apartment.
 The mother is often motivated by the killing of a newborn child by factors such as financial difficulties, the mother's lack of vitality, the attitude towards the child born out of wedlock, or the father's response to the birth of the child.
Young women pregnant with extramarital affairs sometimes commit crimes such as illegal abortion, after which a woman is more likely to become pregnant, as a result of which a woman may be deprived of the opportunity to have children or a family in the future.
 The mistakes of youth leave their mark on the whole life.
While studying the personal characteristics of women who have committed crimes, Professor Lune has studied the influence of certain socio-demographic and socio-psychological factors on women's crime [8, p. 661].
 The professor referred to the influence of age, education, profession, family and social status on women's crime.
Age does not determine the specific crimes committed by women, but it is one of the important circumstances to which a person's social manifestations are related.
  The addiction of women to crime is a little different from the age of men.
 The number of offenders among young women is small.
  However, according to the scientist, not only feminization, but also rejuvenation is taking place in recent years.
Violent perpetrators are more likely to commit violent crimes, while those with high intelligence are more likely to commit mercenary crimes.
  Thus, education leaves its mark on the nature of crime.
The type of employment of a woman և ability to work before committing a crime is of criminological significance. they are reflected in the nature of the action.
Professors Stepanova-Yavchunkovskaya, considering that the crime is mainly conditioned, tried to clarify the notion of criminal motivation, considering that both types of motivation are mercenary-violent.
  Their focus was on mercenary motivation.
 Professor Serebryakova believed that the predominant motive for women to commit crimes was self-interest.
In our opinion, professors Stepanova, Yavchunkovskaya and Serebryakova have taken an extremist approach, giving priority to the interests in the specific motivational system of women crime. A large number of other crimes are committed or may be committed for other reasons.
According to Professor Lune, a significant criminogenic circumstance in the family is the social injustice against women in society.
  Most women cannot have what is predestined by nature - family և children [8, pp. 664, 665].
According to the professor, this is due to a number of circumstances: Men are more likely to die from accidents, crimes, poisonings, injuries than women. Women more often than not men do not have a partner.
  No matter how much gender equality has been promoted, women have been subjected to persecution, discrimination and exploitation in many issues.
Professor Yuri Antonyan singles out the following causes of women's crime in his works dedicated to women's crime. more active participation in social production, the weakening of the family in the main social institutions, first of all, the growing tension in the society, the conflicts մարդկանց hostility between men, which is perceived more and more by women;
However, it should be noted that these are also causes of common crime, "more active participation in public production" is more of a positive factor than a criminal one.
According to some criminologists, adolescent girls who have found themselves in unfavorable conditions, allowed anti-social actions, need to be provided with state "social assistance".
  This is a set of individual educational activities: definition of guardianship or trusteeship, orphanages, special schools, colleges, boarding schools or employment, medical care, etc.
 Many girls with anti-social lifestyles need such help, as they have a lot of venous, somatic and mental illnesses. Without proper treatment, it is practically impossible to bring them back to normal.
Referral of educators, the weight of education.
According to Professor Lune, the church can play an important role in preventing women from engaging in illegal behavior.
The help of the Church should be manifested not so much in the provision of concrete material support to women, but in the form of careful support, moral improvement, and the formation of a new system of values.
The Church, by preaching kindness, love, and mutual aid, can contribute to the socialization of women.
Statistics on female crime are presented on the Armstat.am website (hereinafter referred to as the Website) [13].
  The website presents data on the number of people who have committed crimes in a separate table.
  As a result of the data analysis in the table, the item becomes clear. according to the number of detected criminals in 2018, 2017 In comparison, the number of women who have committed crimes has increased by 31.
 That is, according to the registered data, there is an increase in women's crime.
  Happy in 2018 Number of women who committed crimes in 2017 compared to 60 decreased. Women's crime has decreased in the capital.
The website contains information on the number of convicts who have committed crimes. [14]
  According to the table, the number of women convicted in 2014 was 161.
  In 2015, this number increased to 218.
  In 2015, compared to 2014, 57 more women were convicted.
  The number of women convicted in 2016 was 199. Compared to 2015, 19 fewer women.
 The number of women convicted in 2017 was 181, that is, 18 less than in 2016.
  The number of women convicted in 2018 was 137. Compared to 2017, it is 44 less.
 Summarizing the data presented above, it becomes clear that from 2016 to 2018, a decrease in the number of convicted women was registered.
As it has already been mentioned, the murder of a newborn child by its mother has a special place in women's crime.
 The website contains statistics on the crime of murdering a newborn child by a mother [15, 16].
  From the study of the tables it becomes clear that the murder of the newborn by the mother is not widespread in the Republic of Armenia. In 2017 և 2018, no criminal case was initiated with this crime.
The website also contains data on the number of convicts, covering the period from 2014 to 2018. [17]
 According to the analysis of the chart, the number of convicted men was on average 13.3 times less.
Conclusion of women convicted during the period.
  Causes of female genital mutilation և Conditions can be the totality of all the criminogenic circumstances that condition the crime in general.
Crime Prevention of Women 's Crimes Preventing General Crime և In the prospective constituency, crime prevention activities should not be carried out in an isolated society that would be prone to criminal behavior.
  At the same time in the form of women, without exposing different subjects.
 Only in these conditions can we hope for a decrease in the crime of Karelyklin women.
However, it should be noted that women's crime և positive attitude և is important և quite specific.
The prevention of women crime can be facilitated by the elimination of real discrimination factors in accordance with international documents. Creating normal conditions (material) for married women, especially for single mothers, regular educational work with teenage girls, reduction of alcoholism, drug addiction, poisoning, prostitution among women, elimination.
Housing, employment, institution, penitentiary The issue of women's work is especially important.
  If a woman goes out, it will be very difficult to get a job in a prestigious job, and the available job may be uninteresting, it will not be enough.
After all this, the woman can return to her well-known illegal activity.
 In this respect, the intervention of the state can have a certain significance, granting some privileges to the subjects hired by the perpetrators.
The church can play an important role in preventing the illegal behavior of women.
 The help of the church should be expressed with careful support, morally improving, creating a new value system.
 The church, by preaching kindness, love and mutual help, can promote the socialization of women.
The article was presented at the Student Conference of 29.09.2020.
