The collapse of the USSR showed the negative consequences of deep socio-economic and political integration on the economy of the country, particularly industry and the living standards of the population.
  In this context, this article will present the development processes of Shirak regional industry in the post-Soviet years.
In the structure of the economy, the foundation of the modern economy of Shirak was laid in the 1990s.
Radical changes took place, especially in industry.
 1988 had its active influence in it. The devastating Spitak earthquake of December 7, 1990 փոփոխ The change of the socio-economic system of the 1990s.
  There was a transition from Soviet planned public economy to capitalist market economy.
  In that sense, almost all the industrial enterprises of the region ceased to operate.
  Privatized industrial enterprises lost their markets in the Soviet Union.
  In Shirak, many industrial enterprises were idle, dismantled, liquidated, from which the owners of the enterprises benefited with achievements.
Unemployed in enterprises, which led to the impoverishment of most of them to emigration.
From privatization, the factories were reduced from the market, the workers were taken into account. last և XXI century. The socio-economic changes of the Shirak economy in the beginning of the 19th century, it can be conditionally divided into later periods. - pre-earthquake phase, 1989-1992 - post-earthquake phase, 1993-2000 - the first stage of mass emigration, "impoverishment" of the economy, 2001-2007 - stabilization phase of socio-economic growth, 2008-2012 - socio-economic crisis. The second stage of the population, conditioned by the global socio-economic mass emigration, particularly the Russian crisis.
  Let us mention that the socio-economic spheres of the Republic of Armenia are strictly integrated into the socio-economic system of the Russian Federation.
Stage of reducing the number of Emigrants in 2013-2018 to stabilize the socio-economic situation.
A sharp decline in the potential of Shirak industry was registered by an earthquake in 1989-2000 with industrial privatization, energy crisis, Artsakh war and other factors.
The relinquishment of state control over industrial enterprises led to the fact that the means of production by most of the new owners almost vanished.
  The authorities did not oblige the new owners to operate the industrial enterprises.
Ensuring privatized development It is known that material production in any country directly affects the development of the national economy.
  Thus, the main precondition of the economy is the industry, the services ensuring the development of material production.
  Unfortunately, in the presented period, the highest share of the economy in Shirak was registered in the sphere of retail trade - 25.7 times, and in the industry - a sharp decline.
  Due to this, it can be stated that there has been a transition from a society producing in the economic period to a consumer society.
  This transition is explained first of all by the socio-economic policy adopted by the various governments of the republic.
Now let's present the XX century. last և XXI century. The development processes of Shirak industry in the beginning of the 20th century.
 The foundations of economic development were laid in the 1920s, when state-run socio-economic policies contributed to the development of local industry, and in the 1960s, "industrial enterprises" were built, some of which had not only republican but also regional and textile significance.
  The Shirak region, particularly the large city of Gyumri, became one of the major hubs for the development of industry not only in the republic but also in the South Caucasus in the 1980s.
  The leading branches of the development of the economic industry were the light industry, machine-building, food industry, and furniture-making.
The devastating earthquake of December 7 in Spitak caused damage to the industry of the large region, especially the economic city of 1988.
  Out of 33 industrial enterprises of Gyumri, 13 were completely destroyed, and the rest were partially destroyed [3, vol. 1].
 The material damage of Gyumri industry at current prices is estimated at 250 million. rubles, which accounted for 70% of the main production funds of the city's industry [3, vol. 1].
  It is worth mentioning that 230 industrial facilities were completely or partially destroyed in the disaster zone, which made up 25% of the industrial capacity of our republic [9].
1990 The volume of Gyumri's industrial production increased to 40% in 1988, but since 1991 it has declined again due to socio-economic transformations, geopolitical tensions in the region, and the dissolution of the USSR [3, vol. 3].
  To get an idea of ​​the material losses of the industry, let's bring some numerical indicators. 13.4% of the products produced in the republic by Shirak industrial enterprises, 3.2% in 1997, 2.7% in 2003 [1, page 160] և 2.4% in 2017 [10 ].
 If in the 1980s the Shirak economic region was second only to Yerevan in terms of industrial production in the republic, now it is inferior not only to Yerevan, but also to the volumes of industrial production in Ararat, Syunik, Armavir and Kotayk regions.
In the 1980s, there were 72 industrial enterprises operating in Shirak, producing 1.3 billion rubles a year.
  Large to medium-sized enterprises have a special place in the sphere of industry.
  At present, the total number of industrial organizations in the economic period is dominated by small and medium enterprises, the share of which is 76% [12].
  In the economic period of 2012 Gyumri accounted for 60% of the industrial output [13], while in the 1980s the figure was 75% [2, p. 160].
  1983 There were 53 industrial enterprises in Gyumri, where 48.9 thousand people worked [2, p. 161].
  Of the city's industrial enterprises, 12 were large (501-1000 employees) and 13 were large (1001 more employees).
  The largest enterprises account for 73.2% of the total number of people employed in the industry of the region [2].
 It can be seen from Table 1 that since 2002, a gradual increase in the share of industry has been registered.
  This growth is explained by the operation of new industrial, especially light, food enterprises.
The share of the main branches of Shirak economy in% Table 1. Branches of economy 1997-2002.200720122017Industry Agriculture ConstructionRetail tradeServicesTotally large յունIn the last 30 years the number of registered industrial enterprises has decreased, not only the number of employees.
  The only medium-sized industrial enterprise, Lentex, now operates in the economic sector.
  Let us mention that in 1987-2017. The industrial-industrial number has decreased 14.8 times.
The largest number of employees in enterprises (Table 2) shows that the significant decline in the number of employees in industry was registered in 1987-1995 - about 2.8 times, in 1995-2001 - 5.2 times.
Chirac indicators of potential [15] Table 2.ShirakiardyunabeArdyunaberuArdyunaberarakantyan mejkanartadrankitesakararkshire of umzbaghvatsneridzernarkutive / thousand / frequency tiveAmsakanmijinashkhatavardze entatsikgnerov / lb / 250 rubliTaretiv in 1987 .1995 .2001 .2005 .2008 from .2013 .2017 plan.If the first zhamanakapulum nvazumepaymanavorvatserkrasharzhihetevanknerov number of employees, the in the second case, exclusively by the socio-economic policy pursued by the authorities.
It is clear from the analysis of the digital indicators of Table 2 that in 1987-2017. The share of Shirak industrial production in Armenia has decreased 5.4 times, the number of people employed in industry - 14.8 times.
  The number of industrial enterprises has increased, but large industrial enterprises have disappeared, and in 1995-2017. At present, the salary has increased about 40 times.
[4, p.13].
Having 2016 In Shirak region, products were produced in 101 economic entities, 78 of which were processing industrial enterprises, and mineral resources of various industrial significance, construction, particularly in the region.
Mining Weak Mining production volume exceeds one percent of industry.
  The number of regional mining enterprises is 53, of which 38 are operating, and half of them are located in the Artik region.
Mainly gross industrial enterprises: mining, construction tuff, sand, basalt (near Panik village), andesitadacite (Jajur), dolerite basalt (Kaps).
  Before the liquidation of "Karin Geo" LLC in 2015, they extracted gray coal near the village of Jajur, which was mainly consumed in Shirak.
Industry The processing industry in the Shirak region accounted for 74-83% of the total production volume in different years, and for the mining industry - up to 0.1-2% (see Table 3).
  The food "light" industry occupies a major place in the processing industry (in the Soviet years, the "light industry" - machine-building).
  Visible changes in the structure of industrial products were registered in the processing industry, in the production of electricity, gas and water.
 This change is explained by the increase in the prices of goods produced in the enterprises of electricity, gas and processing industries.
The structure of industrial production of Shirak region by production units (the whole industry is 100%) [16] Table 3. Year Mining Gas, water industry, industrial
  In the 1980s, the output of the industrial sector was about 1/3 of the gross output of the Armenian SSR, which fell to the city of Gyumri.
  In those years, the number of workers in the light industry of the republic was 115 thousand, socks and underwear.
socks, a man, 23% of whom fell to Gyumri.
  Currently, the largest company producing socks in Armenia is "Lentex" LLC, which is located in Gyumri.
  Manufactured in that enterprise since 2013, the Company's products are knitted mainly in the domestic market.
  2013 3% of total production was exported to the UAE, France and Canada [5, 12].
 2016 Lentex had 350 employees and gross output.
  About 10% of the number of employees in Shirak Industrial Enterprises is Lentex, and Arshaluys Light Industrial Company employs 50 people.
Lingerie manufacturer Gorg և Vahan LLC exports more than 90% of its products to Canada [5, vol. 4].
  In Maralik, the army manufactures towels, similar other products [5, p.7].
"Nighttex" company has donated 100 million drams worth of Armenian underwear.
The base was occupied by industrial machinery in the 1980s, and in the Soviet years, the region's industrial machinery.
  Local machine-building enterprises for sports machinery.
In the post-Soviet years, visible positive changes in machine building The potential of machine building was concentrated in the city of Gyumri.
  In those years, 23-28% of the city's industrial output went to the light industry alone [2, p. 162].
  1983 The number of employees in the city's machine-building enterprises exceeded 12,000, in 2017 - 200 [6, year 6].
 It should be mentioned that the Shirak light "machine-building" industrial enterprises of industrial materials have ensured a balance in the sex ratio of the population's employment.
 Women mainly worked in light and men in machine-building and industrial materials enterprises.
  The currently operating part-time machine-building enterprises are "Analytic" devices factory, "Karmshakmekena" OJSC, "Hayord Gyodakyans" car repair factory, "Magnon" LLC.
XX century At the beginning of the last XXI century, the agro-food complex gradually developed in the region, the important components of which were the food processing industry - agricultural raw materials.
  In the first years of RA independence, programs were drawn up to create new agro-industrial enterprises.
 1992 After the installation of the equipment received from Bulgaria at a cost of 100 thousand dollars, it was planned to produce "Pepsi-Cola" soft drinks in Gyumri, and to build a dry fodder factory in the territory of the butcher factory, was the company "Technopol" from Czechoslovakia.
  However, some of the construction units were supplied to the factory, which was limited to the fact that the USSR Foreign Economy Bank refused to transfer the remaining money, arguing that the exchange of foreign currency of the socialist countries was prohibited [3, p. 10].
Agricultural food industry from Shirak economic region.
  One of the leading industries in the region produces raw materials and more than a hundred licensed economic entities and individual entrepreneurs are engaged in the production of raw materials.
  Today there are about 20 enterprises, the relatively largest of which are located in Gyumri, Musayelyan, Amasia, Bandivan and Azatangyugh.
"Alex-Grig" is a sugar production company, which operates for 3-4 months during the year.
  The factory imports raw materials from Brazil [7, vol. 5].
  At present, there are more than eight processing companies in the economic period, of which "Igit" LLC և "Bandivan Kat" produces sour cream, cottage cheese, milk, ice cream.
The largest "Gyumri-beer" in Gyumri is located in the largest beer of the republic -
The gross production of malt produced at the factory amounted to 1.6 billion. dram [11].
"Gyumri exports 1-3% mainly to Russia.
  Beer imports raw materials from the Czech Republic, and hops from Germany [7, 2].
  "Armamas" LLC-beer "LLC produced factory.
In 2012, he received malt from barley brought from Russia, France and the Netherlands, which is used by the "Yerjan Beer" factory [7, p. 3].
To distinguish furniture and confectionery production from other branches of industry development in Shirak, which have no significance in the field of industry.
At the beginning of the XXI century, an attempt was made to compile development programs for the Shirak regional industry.
  Thus, the socio-economic development of the region in 2010-2013. By the decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia, it is planned to invest in the construction of "Karakhach 1" wind power plant with a total capacity of up to 20 MW, later bringing it to 90 MW.
  Let us mention that this program has not been implemented yet.
  There are currently 8 water wells in Shirak with a capacity of 5,600 kW [8, year 3] փոքր a small water well with an annual output of 14.63 million kW.
  The produced electricity satisfies only 18.4% of the electricity consumed in the region [8, p.5].
  If the 90 MW wind power plant in Karakhach is put into operation in the future, it will meet about 90% of the electricity consumption demand in Shirak region.
  The construction of Karakhach wind power plant for the development of a powerful stimulus industry, in particular.
  It should be mentioned that in 2003 the wind energy map was developed by the NERL company of the USA of Armenia, one of the main perspective locations of the wind power plants is the Karakhach mountain pass.
  Founded by an Italian private company, Arerenji LLC has completed the monitoring of the Karakhach mountain pass wind energy project in the Shirak region.
17.1 billion is envisaged in the industrial sphere for the development of the socio-economic-strategic program of Shirak in 2017-2025. to invest AMD [20].
In industry policy, it is mainly planned to implement infrastructure development, SME (small-medium-sized enterprise) business, training, information-consulting support, financial-investment support, slaughterhouse construction projects, which will not have a significant impact on growth.
 It is noteworthy that the large organizations previously operating in the region are gradually giving way to the small ones, which do not ensure the rapid development of the industry.
In summary, it can be stated that up to now the relevant bodies dealing with the development of industry in our republic, businessmen, economists have not been able to compile and implement realistic programs for the development of industry in the Shirak region, especially in Gyumri.
 In doing so, they must first be developed and implemented in order to operate the planned industrial buildings.
They can become business centers, warehouses, areas used for other purposes.
 The best example of that is "Shirak Mall", which has become the best entertainment environment.
слова.
