The etymology of English taboo words is relevant in a new light, as this field is almost unexplored.
  The study of the origin of taboo words allows us to identify the reasons for the historical development and changes in their original meanings.
 English (English <Old English <nglisc), like Armenian, is one of the unique languages ​​whose vocabulary is genetically multilayered.
  English, as a different stage of Indo-European development, had pre-written stages.
  It has undergone various changes over the years and has been constantly replenished and improved.
  Socio-economic developments in our time have led to the tendency of English to become a global language.
The taboo words of the German branch of the German language family և geopolitical language are represented by a series of ancient lexical layers.
 These word units were borrowed from the Indo-European main language, had a stable use in the pre-Germanic language and its dialects, and then fortified in English are words of Indo-European, German-German-German origin.
These words of Anglo-Saxon origin make up 25-30% of the English vocabulary [4], են they are the largest participle words.
mainly [3].
  The total number of taboo words in Native English is 41, of which 16 are English Taboo words of Native German origin.
  The question of the native origin of these words is not subject to dispute; it has been clarified by various sources.
 Being the main words of English reflect the daily activities of people, have limited use և are an integral part of English culture and lifestyle.
Vocabulary units: thus to obtain different Native words of German origin have been used at different stages of English development; most importantly, taboo in times.
Research shows that most of the words in question did not have a taboo function or meaning in the beginning of their use.
  Expressing general semantic meanings, historically these words acquired new meanings, eventually turning into entabuses.
  The native taboo words of German origin are: ass, ass, Indian), tit, beaver.
  These word units, being words of German origin, were handed down from German.
  This fact is substantiated by the existence of these words in other languages ​​belonging to the Germanic branch.
When performing the genealogical classification of the mentioned taboo words, it is possible to find out the absolute or approximate period of the taboo use of those units, the local affiliation of their use, which have been checked by all possible sources.
  We have grouped the individual groups according to the stages of English development: a) Old English taboos (5th to 11th centuries AD) - ass, ass, b) Middle English taboos (late 11th to mid-15th century) - turd , tool, whore, ball, c) taboos in early modern English (from the 15th century to the present): beaver, shit, crock, prick, queen, red Indian, tit, root, spade, yellow.
Below we will consider the linguistic-historical peculiarities of the native taboo words of German origin. Retrospectives 1. Ass / ass units are phonetic variants of the same word concept.
 Butt, with the animal - the part of the body is still a taboo.
 We do not rule out that in the pre-English period it was not perceived as taboo, but there is no information about it.
 It is obvious that both in English and in related languages, its main function is to be a taboo body.
  It is interesting that this word has retained the meaning of taboo at all stages of English development չի has not acquired any additional meanings.
 Ass / ass root: pre-Hindu restored root: * ors - butt, back, pre-German: * arsoz, Old English: ærs / ars - tail, butt.
  English has the following meaning in directly related languages. Old Saxon, Old High German, Old Norwegian ærs / ars, Middle Dutch ærs, Dutch aars, Middle German arsch.
  The source for this word is the Greek word orros - tail, butt, tail, Hittite arrash, Old Irish err - tail.
  It is also available in Armenian - or / vor / or - after the meaning.
  By the way, this unit is one of the unique units of the Indo-European Armenian language, which is also a taboo for Juni's unlimited situational use.
genealogical 2. The word Ball has acquired the meaning of testicle in English since the 14th century.
  The ballocks egg is considered as a comparison.
  This word identifies the following horses: pre-German: * balluz, the reliability of which is based on the Dutch's high bal, Flemish bal, Old High German ballo, German ball.
  It is the restored root of the Indo-European proto-language of this word: * bhel - blow, swell - swell, swell.
  The origin of this word is restored with the help of the Old Norwegian bǫllr և all Armenian - round, circular, whole, like it - dialect plor - male's gland, every egg's gland [5] with the help of word units.
The word in Armenian և is considered taboo.
 In English, the word "round", the meaning of "ball", has been used in English since the 1200s.
  In Old English, the restored but unregistered d * is the * beal, * beall unit.
The shortened version of its bealluc-testicle has been preserved and deposited.
3. The word beaver was used in the 20th century to mean the taboo - female genitals հատված the parts that touch them.
  The original meaning of a large amphibious quadruped rodent of the genus Castor, the four-legged amphibian Castor, had the beofor, befor, befer (formerly bebr) horses in ancient English, which corresponds to the pre-German * bebruz horse.
  Old Saxon bibar, Old Norwegian bjorr, Middle Dutch ոլ Dutch bever, Low German bever, Old High German bibar, German biber are sources for this breeding.
  All these units are based on pre-Indo-European * bhebhrus, more precisely * bher-roots, which have bright, brown, bright-bright; brown meanings.
 The source for this meaning is Latin bebrus, Czech bobr, Welsh befer.
4. The word Crock, as a taboo, is a crock of shit.
  The idiom used in American English as an element of phrase has been used in New English.
  This word has the following features of origin: in German: * krogu - pot, basket, in English - crocc, crocca - basket, clay vessel, pot, Middle English - crokke.
  The source for the restoration of these horses is Old Frisian krocha - basket, Old Saxon kruka, Middle Dutch cruke, Dutch kruik, Old High German kruog - pitcher ", German krug, Old Norwegian krukka - basket, Middle Irish - crocan - basket, Greek Ancient Slavic words krugla - cup.
It is believed that this word may have originated in Flemish, probably related to the verb to crack.
In Middle English it has the meaning croke, crok - peel, peel, peel - hull, husk.
  The figurative meaning - refuse - - to refuse, to reject, in Low German even in colloquial English - crock - dark, false (1650) meanings.
- worthless, has krak 5. The word Prick in the sense of the penis has been used since the 16th-17th centuries.
  It has pre-German origin.
  The advantages are the low German և Dutch prik - point, the Middle Dutch և Swedish prick - point, the existence of very small horses.
In Old English it has pricca - point, hole, particle, a small element of space-time - point, puncture; particle, small portion of space ortime, and in Middle English, prikke's.
6. The taboo of the word Queen, a man with feminine behavior, the homosexual meaning has been used since 1924.
  This word is rooted in the European word * gwen - woman, which is considered to be a variant of the sound * kwenon.
 The basis of this word is quean - the root of a young, healthy woman.
  It corresponds to the horses of the languages ​​from which the pre-Germanic * kwoeniz և անգլերեն Old English - cwen woman, especially the king's wife, queen, female heads of state, are preserved, the corresponding horses preserved in the related languages ​​are Old Saxon quan - woman, Old Norwegian kvaen, Gothic quens.
  In Armenian, which has a distant relation to English, it corresponds to the Old Armenian Qingo.
used by relatives 7. The adjective Red is used in the Red Indian category, which was used in the New English period of development.
  The red component has the following features of origin: pre-German: * rauthan, անգլերեն Old English: read red, the exact origin of which is based on the existence of's consonants, ie Old Norwegian: rauðr, Danish: rød, Old Saxon: rod, Old Frisian: rad , Middle Danish - root, Dutch - rood, German - rot, Gothic - rauþs.
At the heart of all the surviving horses is the Indo-European root * reudh - red, brown root.
  By the way, samiak is the color name for which the general root of the Indo-European standard has been restored.
  Moreover, the root red has been preserved in the surname Read / Reid.
  Here the method of internal restoration is characterized by the original picture of the word in Old English, the long pronunciation of the vowels.
with which the red color of tax perceptions, as an adjective, is connected with the reference to social differentiation.
 One of them was the Bolshevik movement formed in 1917.
  The representatives of that movement compare the color red with their ideas.
  In fact, in the revolutionary processes in Europe, the color red was identified with the Aryan violence, which has been evidenced since 1297, and in 1793 it became the symbol of the French Revolution.
  The root Red is also in the connection with Red Republic, as in the noun Red China, which has been evidenced since 1934.
 As a noun, it has a radical, communist meaning, the first evidence of which is recorded from 1851.
In the Indo-European pre-language there is one root that can be related to the word under discussion.
 The word * red - to scrape, scratch, gnaw - refers to the root.
  In Sanskrit, this word has radati - scratches, rodents - scrapes, gnaws, radanah tooth - tooth, in Latin rodere - to bite, eat - to gnaw, eataway, radere - to scrape, to scrape, to scrape, in Welsh rhathu scratch.
  It is not ruled out that these two identical roots originated from the same genealogical basis.
in the circle.
In Old English 8. Root - dig with the snout - the verb dig with the snout dates back to 1530.
  It is believed that it is taboo to root out the new English wrotan, and in Middle English, wroten - to dig, to dig with the snout.
  The pre-Germanic word for this word is * wrot.
 Old Norwegian rota և Swedish rota - dig out, root out, Middle Low German wroten, Middle Dutch wroeten, Old High German ruozian - plow are the sources for word restoration.
  Addition: * wrod- - to root, to gnaw - to root, gnaw is considered the pre-Indo-European root of this word.
  The word is related to the Old English wrōt - snout, snout - snout, German rüssel snout, snout - snout, perhaps Latin rodere - gnaw - gnaw.
9. The word Shit, in its etymological sense, had a neutral point with a vulgar meaning.
  Taboo excretion, the meaning of exclusion has acquired since 1580 և ceased to be used in that sense in the written word.
  Even in "vulgar" publications of the late 18th century, it is presented in an illegible form in order to remain incomprehensible.
The published verb has * skit-dz in pre-German, and in Old English it is represented by scitte / scitan / scytel - self-cleaning, excretion, diarrhea - purging, diarrhoea.
 The etymology of this word is North Frisian skitj, Dutch schijten, German scheissen (verb).
The restored pre-Indo-European root of the word shit * skei- is to cut, to split, but to separate from the body, to separate the meaning of the meaning is verified in Latin excrementum - to separate, to separate, to exclude, to separate, to separate with the help of words.
 The equivalent is the Old English scearn - manure, filth, the other expression of which is scieran - to cut, to split.
  In Middle English it has shitel - manure, excrement.
  The verb shit is the source for the origin of the noun Shit և adjective.
is he 10. The word spade, as a taboo, has a derogatory connotation of slaughter, which has been used since 1928.
  The basis for this meaning is the color symbol of the playing card.
  The word formation is related to the pre-Germanic * spadan unit, which is based on the Old Frisian spada - spade, Middle Dutch spade sharp, sword, Old Saxon spado, Middle Low German spade, German spaten horses.
  In Old English it has the meaning of spada shovel, a tool for digging.
  The pre-Indo-European restoration is * spe-dh, and the root * spe - meaning a long, flat piece of wood, which is also based on the Greek spathև - shovel, blade, blade, Italian spade - sharp (plural: spada), Old English spon wood piece, fragment, old Norwegian span - fragment with the existence of horses.
11. The word tool has been used in the sense of penis since the 1550s.
  In pre-German, the * tōwalan - instrumental version was used, which is based on preparing the meaning.
  In Old English it has tōl - a tool used by a craftsman to mean a weapon.
 The source for this word is the Old Norwegian tol ձ, how to make tawian in Old English (see taw).
12. The word Tit in the sense of taboo has been used since the 16th century.
  In Old English it has tit / titt - peas, dress, nipple, breasts.
  The origin is German, the equivalents of which in Kannada - tit, և in German - zitze.
 The word "slang" is also used in America, dating to the early 20th century.
The modern slang tits (plural) version has been certified since 1928.
 It is assumed that the original form of this word was teat or dialect and plural titties.
It is believed that this word has a Scandinavian origin - it is connected with the Icelandic word titlingur - sparrow.
  The more advanced meanings are: little horse և girl, then breast.
  The modern meaning of the word dates back to the beginning of the 18th century.
  By the way, we assume that the equivalent of this word in Armenian is the dialect swallow name, which also belongs to the number of taboo words in Armenian.
From the 15th century.
  Lexicology13. The word Turd means taboo unpleasant, despicable person, acquired in the pre-Germanic language: * turdam, և Old English tord - excretion, excrement - pieces of excrement, based on the Middle Dutch torde - excretion, excretion - piece of excrement, Old Norwegian tort-wevel - buffalo, beetle trick - dung beetle units.
In the Indo-European proto-language it has the * drtom egg, which is based on * der- - divide, peel, peel the root.
 In this sense, it is equivalent to the meaning of the word shit, that is, what is released from the body.
ձևերն 14. The word whore has been used in a taboo sense since the 1200s.
  It later means hōre - prostitute, prostitute.
  Her * hōran or * hōrā-female horse is considered to be pre-Germanic, probably one of the genealogical one, which she wants in the sense.
  The source of such meaning is the Old Frisian hor - prostitution, the Old Norwegian hora betrayal, adulterer, Danish hore, Swedish hora, Dutch hoer, old German pillow huora - prostitution, German hure "Gothic hors - adulterer, prostitute".
 As a verb, there is horinon - to commit adultery.
For this word, the pre-Indo-European * ka- sympathize, wish for the root is restored, which in other languages ​​is in the sense of a lover, a lover, a friend.
  It has Indo-European roots in the Latin word carus - beloved, precious.
  In Old English it could be pronounced in dialect versions: * hoor, horh.
  The spelling of the word "wh" came from the beginning of the 16th century as a hore spelling change in Middle English.
Other words are associated with this word, such as the Hindu word pute, which probably literally means girl.
 It is derived from the vulgar Latin * puttus d.
 It is not ruled out that it may have originated from the Latin tempting horse putidus (see poontang).
  The Welsh word putain was translated from French, probably through Middle English.
The Greek has porne - prostitution horse, which is associated with the word pernemi sell. This is probably how it relates to the slave trade as a prostitute.
 By the way, in the system of Armenian taboos there is a word equivalent to the Old French pute dzin և with the sound և´ written, which has the meaning of a woman's body name - vagina, and the Armenian word for prostitute is borrowed from Greek.
Existence is justified15. The word yellow has been used in the taboo sense since the late 19th century.
 This word has the * ghel- - glitter root in the Indo-European proto-language, combining the derivative meanings of green և yellow.
  In this sense, the Greek khloros is yellowish green, the Latin helvus is yellowish, with a laurel hue.
  In Old English it has geolu, geolo / geolwe - yellow versions.
  The pre-Germanic * gelwaz horse is considered to be based on the Old Saxon, Old High German gelo, Middle Dutch ghele, Dutch geel, Middle High German gel, German gelb, also gold, Old Norwegian gulr, Swedish gul - yellow horses.
In conclusion, most of the words discussed have undergone various semantic changes during the historical development of English, becoming modified variants of certain stable words, such as the taboo words of German origin examined.
  This fact suggests that over the centuries, English has developed a special, well-developed system for translating taboo words.
