The Republic of Armenia is a state in the stage of overcoming economic difficulties, having social difficulties, at war, therefore the policy adopted by the Government of the Republic of Armenia is aimed at solving these problems.
In writing the article, we aim to analyze in the context of the study of international experience, to reveal the effectiveness and peculiarities of the budget policy pursued in the direction of solving the above-mentioned problems of the Republic of Armenia.
The budget system in Armenia is the main financial link of the country's financial "Republic of Armenia.
  According to the budget, "The budget system of the Republic of Armenia is regulated by the norms of law - the law of the Republic of Armenia on the economic system of the Republic of Armenia", based on the state structure of the Republic of Armenia, is the totality of the following two levels. the first level is the state budget, the second level is the community budgets ”[1].
It is necessary to make a certain distinction between the concepts of "state budget", "community budget" and "budget".
"Budget" is the general name of this category. It represents the income-expenditure estimate for a certain period, approved by the competent management body.
 As a financial document, it reflects in quantitative terms the process of centralization of funds and their use by the state.
 It is not only a financial document, but also a legal document, which, when approved by the state legislature, acquires [2].
  State and community budgets are collectively referred to as financial programs for the period of a certain period of government or local self-government bodies [3].
consolidated budget.
  These budgets are budget solution.
The budget of state functions occupies a priority place in the structure of the state budget system of the Republic of Armenia. The problem of financial security reserved for state implementation. Being inseparable parts of the budget system, these two sectors, state and community budgets, are closely connected.
This is mainly reflected in the allocations from the state budget to the community budgets.
  Own revenues of community budgets in our country are still at a low level, due to which local self-governments are unable to exercise their powers reserved by law. for implementation.
It should be aimed at solving the existing problems in various aspects of the public life of the state.
    Such problems or priorities can be, for example, the necessary change in the structure of public production of high-tech technologies necessary for the economy, etc.
  The state spends budget expenditures to solve these problems.
Development, investment, industries - Each state decides where to invest more, based on its priorities և national interests, և, as a rule, where to make the most investments, and there we will get the preferred result.
In the coming years, the Government of the Republic of Armenia will further strengthen the following expenditure priorities of the state budget. Financial support for reforms in certain areas of the social sphere, such as education, healthcare, social protection, as well as for increasing the efficiency of state bodies, making services more accessible. economy և energy sector [4].
In order to find out the peculiarities of the RA budget expenditures, let's compare the state budget expenditures and expenditure structures of several other countries in the region.
The overall difference in the state budgets of these three countries is significant if we compare Armenia and Azerbaijan, Georgia and Azerbaijan.
In Azerbaijan, the volume of state budget expenditures is about 4.5 times more.
  In Armenia it makes only 3.407 billion. USD, in Georgia - 3.538 billion. USD անում in Azerbaijan - 14.868 billion. US dollars.
Figure 1. Operational classification of state budget expenditures (USD) in the Republics of Armenia, Georgia, Azerbaijan in 2019. [5,6,7].
Figure 2. Operational classification of state budget expenditures (%) in the Republics of Armenia, Georgia and Azerbaijan. Objective 2019 Obviously, according to the operational classification of the budget, the maximum expenditures in the Republic of Azerbaijan will be made in the field of economic activity.
 It should be noted that Azerbaijan's economy is diverse. Production of steel, machinery և equipment, synthetic rubber, tires, chemicals, fruit և canned fish, grain plants և etc.
  Despite this diversity, the oil and gas sector accounts for 37% of gross domestic product and more than 90% of exports.
  The main problem of the economy is the weakening of the economy's dependence on the oil and gas industry, as the change in oil prices in the world market significantly affects the country's economic situation.
  Due to the sharp decline in oil prices in the last 12 years, Azerbaijan has several times found itself in a socio-economic crisis.
 The first economic crisis was observed in 2008, which was short-lived, in 2009 oil prices began to rise, reaching $ 120.
 The second crisis was in 2015, when the price of oil fell sharply to $ 60.
The third crisis in Azerbaijan is registered today, when oil prices are falling historically, which means more damage to the Azerbaijani economy than in previous cases.
2020 On April 20, the price of a barrel of WTI oil reached a historic high of $ 40.
  This is the first case in history when the price of oil can be negative.
 The negative price implies that the producers have to pay the buyers to buy the oil.
  Happy time 21.
In 1956, the price of a barrel of WTI oil reached $ 0.
 It reached its historical low for the second time in one day, reaching its current price.
It should be noted that the Republic of Azerbaijan has achieved some success in this regard, if we take into account the data published by the National Statistical Committee on the structure of GDP, according to which since 2012, oil and gas production in GDP does not exceed non-oil and gas production.
Such huge investments in the economy in the very near future indicate the crisis situation.
 We think that this example of Azerbaijan should be followed by the Armenian government, not to create certain results in the state review, particularly in the areas of general public services, economic activities.
In general, the budget of the Republic of Armenia spends a lot of money on public services, in the spheres, as a warring state, like Armenia, huge financial investments are made in the field of defense.
  If we try to draw parallels between the military expenditures of these two countries, the difference is huge - about 3 times (Figure 1).
[9] However, most of the budget expenditures in the Republic of Georgia are aimed at social protection. As in Armenia, Georgia, this sector is targeted.
Although Georgia has succeeded in economic reforms, as evidenced by the growth of GDP in the last 5 years - almost 1.4 times, GDP per capita increased from 4062 US dollars to 4764 US dollars. Multi-social problems with high unemployment (13.5 % In 2018), inequalities ք poverty [10].
  According to 2019, pensioners made up 16% of the total population, the minimum pension is 200 GEL, and the minimum consumer basket is 174 GEL. If we note that the minimum poverty line in Georgia is 82.8 GEL per month, we can say that retired citizens are working. They are not poor, they are able to consume 2300 calories equivalent to the minimum consumer basket.
  As of December 2019, more than 150.2 thousand people under the age of 18 were considered socially vulnerable, of which 46.3 thousand were under 6 years old.
Georgia leads the way in Europe in the number of children living in extreme poverty, with an overall poverty rate of 20.1%.
Large financial investments are also made in the spheres of general public services, economic activity and education (see Figure 2).
Maximum state budget expenditures in Armenia will be involved in mitigating social protection issues.
  The "Social Protection" system is a set of tools, which is aimed at meeting the "normal life of the individual ընտանիքի society և material needs" [12].
In order to make the existing problems in the social sphere more vivid, we will present certain data from the target groups representing the sphere. 16% of the population - more than 466 thousand, is retired, the number of families receiving social benefits - 86,200, the number of registered first, second and third degree disabled - 19,200, the number of unemployed - about 220,500 in 2017. 25.7% of the population was poor - of which 1.4% are extremely poor, and in 2018 - corresponding 23.5% և 1%.
Despite the implemented programs, which are financed by the state, the compliance with the needs of the residents continues to be problematic, as the people who receive social benefits are still poor, ie their amount does not exceed the poverty line of 42621 drams.
Benefits As we mentioned, each state must make financial investments to solve its problems, but, first of all, it must create those financial means. This speaks of the need to create a developed economy.
For comparison, we can present the peculiarities of the budget expenditures of the Russian Federation as an example.
 Russia, as a developing country, seeks to further develop its economic opportunities, so of the 2019 federal budget of 20 trillion 187.84 billion rubles, the largest investments were made in economic relations - 27.1% of the budget, defense - 16.2% 4.6% for education, 1.1% for public services, 12.5% ​​for social protection.
which is Germany, the most economically developed country in Europe, from the 2019 budget - 356.4 billion. 2.9% was allocated to the development of economic relations, 12.1% was allocated to defense, 5.12% to education, and 3.5% to social protection.
Figure 3. Operational classification of state budget expenditures in the Republic of Armenia for 2017-2020. (billion drams) 1 Next, let's discuss the expenditure characteristics of the state budget of Armenia in the pre-revolutionary and post-revolutionary period.
According to the budget, there were no drastic state changes in pre-revolutionary and post-revolutionary Armenia (according to Figure 4), in percentage terms it was insignificant in the spheres of defense, general public services, social protection, public order, healthcare.
 This means that now the priorities that were relevant before the pre-revolution have been preserved.
Thus, in public services of general nature, huge funds have been allocated from the state budget. 19.7% of the budget, if we compare with neighboring countries, whose "population" and "budget" volumes exceed our data, we can definitely say that the state budget program of our republic obviously needs to be reviewed.
In the sphere of defense of the Republic of Armenia in 2019, 19.1% of the budget was invested, which is lower than in 2017 in terms of the main indicators of the amended draft of the state budget of the Republic of Armenia in 2017.
  This should be connected with the fact that the "expenditures" and revenues of the state budget have increased compared to the previous years.
Strengthening the defense sector is of strategic importance for the Republic of Armenia.
  In connection with the military industry, today Armenia has its own weapons, which seemed a few years ago.
7.9% of the expenses were allocated to education from the RA budget.
The structure of education expenditures is dominated by expenditures on secondary education - 44․4%, expenditures on և pre-school և elementary general education.
In 2019, the share of expenditures on support services provided by education has significantly increased.
2019 9% industrial growth was registered during the year, the share of processing industry increased by about 7 percentage points, the share of mining industry decreased by 3 percentage points.
In 2019, a 9.4% increase in export volumes was registered. In particular, we have an increase in brandy exports by about 27%, an increase in exports of vegetable products by 18.5%, an export of chocolate products by about 15%, etc.
The growth of wine exports is fascinating. During 2019, it has increased by more than 50%.
  This is a new development in the economy.
  In general, the "export", the "economic growth rate" has increased.
  According to the NSS of Armenia, such a high growth of the gross domestic product has not been registered since 2007 - about 6.6 trillion.
  It should be noted that positive indicators were not registered in all spheres.
 In particular, it refers to agriculture.
In the last few months, both in the whole world and the spread of the COVID 19 infection, it has caused a number of problems.
There are difficulties in the spheres of education and economy, which, especially in the field of healthcare, lead to huge unforeseen expenditures in Armenia.
We think that the development of the economy should be put at the root of the solution of these sectoral problems in Armenia, the investment of a large amount of financial means in it և the rational use.
  The development of the economy (establishment of new branches, development of existing branches) presupposes the creation of jobs, which solves many social problems, in addition, it makes it possible to increase the budget, and therefore the possibility of solving existing investment problems in various fields.
  Based on our analysis, we can say that, in fact, the state budget expenditure algorithm is subject to some revision.
  In particular, it is necessary to make larger expenditures: • in the field of science and education, as they are innovations of the state, the basis of development of every knowledge • in the field of defense. Being a warring country; surrounded by countries with an aggressive attitude towards Armenia, the development and modernization of the defense sector should be a priority for us. • We attach great importance to increasing investments in the activity to create a strong economy and thus provide other sectors with financial means.
