Preface.
  One of the most important issues facing the international community today is the protection of the rights of the child in cases where one parent, disregarding the other parent's custody of the child, transfers the child to another state, prohibits the other parent from associating with him or her. rights.
  In the modern world, the number of cases of child trafficking is increasing due to the increase in the number of divorces, the ease of international transportation, the increase in the number of mixed marriages, and a number of other reasons.
Illegal transportation or custody of children causes serious consequences not only for the child, but also for the parent with whom the child loses contact as a result of the child's illegal transfer.
The parent who illegally transferred the child usually seeks custody of the child in the country where the child was transferred illegally.
  Thus, a number of problems arise after the return of the child, which require complex measures to be taken.
The above-mentioned legal relations are comprehensively regulated by the 1980 Hague Convention on Civil Approaches to International Child Abduction. by the Convention, which is the basic civil law mechanism for the protection of the rights of a parent with the right to custody of a child.
The Convention provides for a number of comprehensive arrangements for the return of children illegally transferred from their place of residence to another country in violation of the custody of another parent.
  The Convention is the only internationally recognized document that establishes effective means and mechanisms to ensure the de facto return of a child in the event of an illegal transfer of a child.
The Convention is based on the presumption that the unlawful transfer or custody of a child is not in the best interests of the child, except in exceptional cases provided for in the Convention.
The number of member states of the Convention is currently 101.
  2007 The Convention entered into force on March 1, 2007 for the Republic of Armenia. from June 1 [9].
  The Convention sets out two main objectives: to ensure the immediate return of children illegally transferred or detained in a State, the Contracting State, and (b) to ensure effective respect for the rights of guardianship and visitation of a Contracting State in other Contracting States (Article 1).
Article 3 of the Convention provides that the transfer or custody of a child is unlawful if it infringes the rights of guardianship conferred jointly or severally under the law of a person, institution or other body in the State where the child normally resided shortly before the transfer or custody. or those rights were effectively exercised jointly or individually at the time of custody or would have been exercised had it not been for the transfer or retention.
 In fact, the analysis of the Convention makes it clear that in order to be eligible for immediate repatriation under the Convention, an entity must have custody of the child.
A parent who has only the right to visit cannot use the Convention to demand the return of a child from a custodial parent.
  The concept of "right of access" is defined by the Convention as the right to transfer a child from one place of permanent residence to another for a limited period of time (Convention, Article 5 (b)).
Consequently, the Convention protects the right of access, but not to an equal degree of guardianship.
According to Article 4 of the Convention, the application of the Convention shall be terminated if the child reaches the age of 16 years.
Although the Convention uses the term "pre-emptive strike", it does not provide for civil but administrative "civil proceedings" to achieve its stated objectives.
  The reason for establishing such a procedure is that the Convention seeks to restore the other parent's violated custody rights by ensuring the immediate return of the child և to ensure the permanent extradition (extradition) of the parent who illegally transferred the child.
Consequently, the notion of "foreclosure" as defined in the Convention has a criminal meaning.
  The notion of "abduction" as defined in the Convention is an abbreviated form of "unlawful".
  "Illegal transfer" is the taking of a child from a person who carries custody of a child.
  "Illegal custody" is the detention of a child without the consent of a person entitled to custody.
It should be noted that the Convention does not apply to disputes involving the determination of custody or visitation rights of a child.
  It guarantees the dispute over the decision on custody rights by the court to which it has jurisdiction.
Consequently, the procedural norms ensuring the immediate return of the child։ apply to the substantive dispute relating to the custody or visitation of the child. [17]
The analysis of the Convention makes it clear that in order for an act to be considered "child abduction" or for the transfer of a child to be illegal, it is necessary that the law on the place of permanent residence of the child be established.
 However, the Convention does not allow the courts of the Contracting States to take different approaches to determining the place of permanent residence as a result of the application of the Convention. There are 762 cases on the International Information on the Determination of the Child of International Residence on the INCADAT official information website.
  It is noted in the professional literature that in no other field of private international law have so many court decisions been made on the interpretation of the concept as there are on the interpretation of the concept of "permanent residence of a child".
  Studying the concept of "settlement"'s experience of applying the Convention ումները Approaches in the theoretical literature, we come to the conclusion that there is a need to establish common criteria for determining the place of permanent residence of a child.
  In particular, "a review of case law of permanent Contracting States, such as the United States [5] and the United Kingdom [6], reveals that the Contracting States apply different criteria in determining the place of permanent residence of a child. There are two main approaches." The first is to give priority to the parents' intentions regarding the child's place of residence as a criterion for determining the child's place of residence, and the second is to give priority to the fact that the child enters the country.
 In the Law on the Return of a Child Illegally Transferred to the Republic of Armenia or Illegally Retained in the Republic of Armenia, priority will be given to the fact that the child is related to the state and has become accustomed to that state.
In case of the draft adoption, after the entry into force of the Convention for the Republic of Armenia, a number of measures were taken by the Government of the Republic of Armenia, և legal acts were adopted to ensure the national fulfillment of the international treaty obligations under the Convention.
Thus, the decision 952-N of August 2009 was adopted on August 20 [4], according to which the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Armenia was appointed the Central Body by the Government Convention No.
 In addition, to ensure compliance with the obligations set out in the Convention On February 5, 1980, the Hague Convention on the Civil Approach to International Child Abuse was adopted. The procedure for cooperation of the competent authorities of the Republic of Armenia for the implementation of the Convention of October 25, 2006 [3].
Referring to the material and legal norms regulating this sphere, we consider it possible to mention that the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Armenia has also introduced the draft law "On the Return of Children Illegally Retained in the Republic of Armenia" (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) [2].
It should be noted that the draft stipulates that the central body of the Republic of Armenia offers the respondent միջոցով to the applicant (through the central body of the requesting state or directly) to resolve the dispute amicably through reconciliation.
  If, as a result of reconciliation, an agreement has been reached to return the child, the process of returning the child shall be organized in the manner prescribed by this law.
  A similar regulation is provided for in Australian law, in particular the Central Authority shall take appropriate measures, including conciliation, voluntary return, etc. [18]
In order to enshrine the objectives set out in the Convention by national law, the Civil Procedure Code of 9 February 2018 [1] provided for a new type of special litigation case: the case of the return of a child illegally transferred to the Republic of Armenia or illegally detained in the Republic of Armenia.
  Moreover, according to Article 208, Part 2 of the RA Civil Procedure Code, the Court is not constrained by proceedings on the return of a child illegally transferred or detained in the Republic of Armenia, evidence, motions, suggestions, explanations, objections, objections or concrete initiatives. to obtain information on the facts necessary for the resolution of the case.
 Therefore, the Court examines the cases of ex officio on the return of a child illegally transferred to the Republic of Armenia or illegally detained in the Republic of Armenia.
In the context of discussing possible procedural issues in child custody, we can consider addressing issues related to international pre-trial hearings in these cases, as the Convention is based on the principle that the fastest procedures should be used to achieve the stated objectives.
  In particular, the six-week period laid down in Article 11 of the Convention requires that domestic legislation provide for the prompt and effective investigation of international child abduction cases, as in many cases this breach makes it impossible to ensure the immediate return of the child.
For example, in the case of the Federal Republic of Germany, based on the principle of prompt examination of cases under the Convention within a period of six weeks, The decision of the RA Court of Appeals on the examination of international child abuse cases is final and is not subject to appeal.
  It should be noted that there is an international attempt to limit the appeal of a child to the international examination by only one instance in the Republic.
According to the 1990 International Law on the Settlement of Disputes Concerning the Child The case of international child abuse in the Federal Republic of Germany is subject to a two-tier system of investigation, as amended by the Act of 5 April 1999.
  In the Federal Republic of Germany, in particular, these cases are heard (family courts in the courts of first instance act as courts having exclusive jurisdiction over family disputes), միայն are subject to appeal only in a court of appeal, the judgment of which is final, not subject to appeal to the Federal Supreme Court.
  We consider that in order to ensure the effective implementation of the Convention in our country, it is necessary to define a two-tier system of examination of these cases.
Conclusion.
  In this paper, by analyzing the national legal norms adopted in the Republic of Armenia to ensure the fulfillment of the international obligations undertaken by the Convention, we identified the existing legislations, and proposed, in our opinion, the detailed analysis through international coverage of cases of child abduction.
  The draft touched upon the material and legal norms envisaged for the regulation of legal relations.
