Preface.
  The article analyzes the meaningful and profound interpretations of the British missionaries, the British military connoisseur and spy Lawrence of Arabia, the "interesting" Armenian identity, from the linguistic-cultural-cognitive point of view.
As if the sources were selected in 1914. The memoir-report "Travel and Politics in Armenia" [1] was written by the Baxtons, and the American journalist Lincoln Stephens was selected for the analysis of Lawrence Arab's views in 1919. The exclusive interview "Armenians Are Impossible" [2].
  Nominal units characterizing the Armenian mentality and linguistic culture are examined, trying the non-linguistic basis of the analysis.
To expose the urgency of the work through the fact that in the age of globalization, the "language and culture issues of nationality" are subject to changes due to the influence of American and European values.
The purpose of the work is to re-interpret the Baxtons և Lawrence-Arab woman's mental structure, culture, and behavioral characteristics in order to reinterpret them based on the requirements of the time.
According to Anthony Smith, national identity is the symbol, preservation and continuous reproduction of national identity memories, stories, values, customs, which creates a legacy for nations, the individual becomes through that inheritance [3].
 In essence, historical memory, national self-consciousness and value systems are used, which provide a solid basis for national reconstruction over time.
  According to Smith, the basic element of any human identity is memory, the realization of a personal connection with the past.
  Both historical and public memory consist of complete or separate episodes of a nation's real or imagined historical past, where people's knowledge and attitudes are used. Abrahamyan tries to present the Armenian "striving for his roots" as "having the complex of being the first" [7].
It is not accidental that in the current processes of globalization, issues related to national character and peculiarities of world perception are studied in detail not only by separate disciplines, but also in interdisciplinary spheres.
about the episodes [5,6].
  In the mentioned context, Armenians and Armenia through the eyes of foreigners. It should be noted that at the end of the XIX century և it flourished in the first half of the XX century և In Europe, especially in Great Britain, there was a great interest in Armenians and Armenia.
As a rule, at the request of the British government, reports and memoirs containing reliable and unbiased details and facts are created at the request of the British government, which are of great value today. Researchers provide information on the history of the Armenian Genocide. պահանջ a demand կողմից by a given group of society for a specific function և consciousness, which directs the actions of the representatives of that society [9].
and merits, aspirations [8].
The Baxtons, after a detailed study, had to find out at the request of the British government to what extent it was possible to "civilize" the Armenians.
  Most likely, the monopoly of the Silk Road was the ultimate goal of the British government, which, however, was presented as an honest and moral tendency to "civilize" the Armenians.
Highly appreciating the Buxtons' travelogue, Christopher Walker emphasizes that the report fully reveals the state of affairs on the eve of World War I.
Instead of the name of the Ottoman Empire, the Baxtons mention the name of Armenia in their report as the place of their arrival.
  During the long journey of about a year, they represent the Armenians in their homeland, Russia-Armenia, in the Armenian-populated regions of Persia.
In Turkey-Armenia, in Armenia, the Baxtons are immediately attracted by the diligence of the Armenians, the ability to get a rich harvest from the arid landslides in the rocks and mountains, the cleanliness of the houses and orphanages, the mythical beauty of the Armenian woman, the merchants, the Eastern Armenian man's devotion to his family.
 Moreover, it is mentioned that even in those difficult conditions, the houses of the Armenians were built on the ground, while the Kurds lived in the trenches.
  However, it was impressive for the missionary-travelers that the opinion spread in the European society, according to which the Armenians corresponded to reality, the psychology of the merchant was not typical for all Armenians.
  It is mentioned that he was tried with the intention of the Armenian enemy in order to humiliate the Armenian dignity.
The Buxtons revolted against this idea and wrote that in fact the Armenians, linguists, mainly worked as teachers in Europe.
  At the Armenian Lyceum in Tbilissi (Georgia), they admire the level of education and are surprised to find that Armenians work with the Montessori methods, while in Europe these methods are still being used.
  They are surprised that the church all over the world has always hindered education and science, and the Armenian Church has been the permanent organizer of that process.
Under the unbearable yoke of Turkey, the Armenians, who were struggling to survive, created funds and found benefactors among the Armenians abroad, providing brilliant European education opportunities for their sons.
  The Baxtons, however, do not understand why some call the Armenian a coward, when only five or six old hunting rifles with the most modern and high-quality German weapons belong to the entire Armenian village.
The Buxtons reported to the British Parliament that the European armed groups, which were not subject to the Turkish government but operated under its auspices, were being paid with Armenian property.
  Referring to Andranikikajer, the participants, the Buxtons think that the Turks are afraid of a huge intellectual and structural element, եթե if the Turk is unable to defeat the Armenian with his mind, he manages to do it by using brute force.
According to him, the talented Armenian who enriches the world treasury, and the shaky Kurds, even from the terra of the armed defense force, which is able to defend the Armenian pogroms in the Zeytun-Baxtons region with weapons, can not only defend itself, but can ensure peace in the whole region.
He is brave and quick to orient himself in the situation.
 According to the Baxtons' analytical interpretations, the reason for the unhappiness of the Armenians is to be found in the difference between their high degree of development, uniqueness, and the barbaric level of their masters.
  At the end of the trip, the missionaries note with pain that the Armenians of Turkey-Armenia are in the most desperate situation, who need to be rescued immediately from the developed Turks, the Turkish government organizing and controlling the Armenian massacres, which is not only incapable of reforms, but has remained the same barbarian.
  Armenians were fighting for their basic right to life in Western Armenia.
  Armenians loyal to the same state, declared an enemy of the state, were persecuted, deported, and brutally killed, while the barbaric Turks conquered the Armenian lands through deportations and massacres, solving the problem of demography, and the golds of the Armenians helped to acquire weapons and ammunition to take part in the war.
  Getting acquainted with the Armenian identity and mentality, the dying Armenian for the sake of family, religion, homeland, which, according to Buxtonner, the Armenian was different from the Englishman for the sake of family, religion, homeland, was able to organize and solve the nation's education. To be a valiant warrior and commander in chief.
 The beauty and loyalty of the Armenian woman, her husband's comrade-in-arms and friendship were also appreciated by the Baxtons.
  It is possible to "civilize" an Armenian with British support.
 The Baxtons decide that the Armenian on the brink of a barbaric East's civilized West's must be saved with the help of the European community, which, for some unknown reason, did not notice the Turkish barbarians and was reluctant to offer help.
The problems of culture, the exile of the plays, the torture.
  According to the Arab, the British and the Americans will teach him to work hard to succeed (should teach them towork hard to succeed), but the Armenian does not want to do hard work, he wants to use his intellectual potential to be a doctor and a lawyer, but not to work. in the mines of the earth.
  It seems that Lawrence does not approve of the love and inclination of Armenians for knowledge.
 It makes Lawrence afraid to worry ․ An Armenian aspiring to education և science will strive for world governance, as he's best for his logic, psychology և physical vitality (Theyhave gone forward logically, psychologically, physiologically).
  In the English version, the root is logically repeated three times, emphasizing the thought through stylistic repetition.
 Lawrence makes an Armenian definition. Armenians should work for Armenia, not Armenia for Armenians.
  Strange as it may sound, he nevertheless admits that he was a very civilized, intelligent Armenian living in a foreign land.
The Buxtons also note that national dignity, which is one of the components of Armenian identity, has never allowed him to bow to a foreigner.
 Lawrence admits that the Armenians are the most superior, the most developed and the smartest in terms of civilization (themost intelligent, the most perfectlypointpoint of view).
  A perfect description of the nation, but step by step Lawrence's hatred of Armenians and its deeply rooted reason become apparent.
  According to Lawrence, unlike the Buxtons who want to save the Armenians, the only possible solution to the Armenian question is the extermination of the sworn Christian Armenians. The enemies of the Armenians do their job well, they enjoy the pleasure of killing the Armenians until the end. They do not care that the Armenian disappears completely, and they always leave a woman and a man who, after a day's hard work (that is, confirms that the Armenian is a creator of hard-working goods), multiply and spread all over the world (bred and bred and bred, spreading and spreading).
 The effect of the melody created by the use of the consonant (b, d, s, t, m, l) of the stylistic repetition of the labor-worker reveals Lawrence's pronounced dissatisfaction, which eventually leads to exaggeration. Armenians secretly breeding, slyly spreading around the world, cunningly silent.
 It was said in 1919, when all Armenians and all progressive humanity had already witnessed the Armenian Genocide.
Lawrence seems to be trying to sow enmity towards the harmless Armenian by humiliating him and assuring the American journalist that the first Christian Armenian nation, the embodiment of the best features of the Jew and all other nations, will try to exploit all nations.
 According to Lawrence, the Armenian is perfect and beloved by God, the Armenian will never want to work in the mines of Armenia for a foreign power.
 He reproduces in an organized and silent way և Can one day become so powerful that he will not allow a foreigner to become the master of the natural resources of his country.
  It has an Armenian intellectual potential, which in favorable conditions can promise a great future to the Armenians.
    An Armenian standing firmly on his own land is invincible, he must be separated from Armenia.
 An Armenian should not have Armenia, because, according to Lawrence, he can give his wealth to others only for temporary use, although he wants to live in big coastal cities, renting, making a profit, earning from the sale of shares, capital, money from someone else's hard work.
  In this way, Lawrence tries to convince the American Stephens that it is necessary to eradicate the Armenian from the face of the earth, first removing him from his homeland.
 Yes, Lawrence understands the nature of the Armenian correctly: the Armenian will not humiliate himself in front of a foreign exploiter, it is incompatible with his national image, he is tolerant, but he will not tolerate injustice, he may not work, create, accumulate just because he does not serve the foreigner. for they are a blessed people.
Due to his natural intellect, ability to orientate quickly and diligence, the Armenian manages to be ahead of his rivals, arousing the envy of the latter.
 Perhaps the economic envy is the reason why Lawrence the Arab makes Armenians call the highest degree impossible, intolerable (And the Armenians are thenth degree).
 According to Lawrence, the most convenient way to exterminate an Armenian is an American, because he already has the experience of successfully exterminating Native Americans, he has never felt a sting of conscience.
 The Turks are very uneducated for the genocide of the Armenians, they only want to own the riches created by the Armenians, the Englishman still has a lot to do in Europe.
 But Lawrence the Arab, well acquainted with the peculiarities of the Armenian identity, is not sure whether an Armenian who does not fear the blessed foreigner can be annihilated, even if the unfavorable conditions of the homeland force him to leave the homeland.
  According to him, the perfect Armenian nation must be completely destroyed.
Conclusion 1. The views of the Buxtons և Lawrence of Arabia were largely the same in terms of the positive image of the Armenian, but if the former called for the salvation of Europe from the Christian-Armenian barbarian Turk, then the Arab, describing the Armenian as a human being, thought that he should be exterminated for those characteristics.
2. According to the Baxtons, an Armenian has a very different identity, which will allow him to "civilize" with the help of Britain.
3. The image of a wise, proud, humble stranger, brave and extreme, has not changed significantly in a hundred years, but it is difficult to say how the modernization process will affect the mentality of an Armenian with such a description.
4. One of the merits of the report is that the authors use the toponyms Armenia, Turkey-Armenia, Russia-Armenia in the text, emphasizing that the Armenian lived in his homeland.
