Preface.
 In the majority of complex Armenian words, the part that is the main semantic center is the last component.
  In rare cases, when there is an inverse relationship: Greek credible, dignified, capital, the components of complexity are partly interpreted as ordinary relations, partly as horses derived from the phrases of worthy faith, worthy honor [5, p. 220; 2, p. 278].
 The latter expresses a meaning that is concretized through the first component.
 Moreover, the preferred component can be nominal or verbal.
In the first case, the connection of the components of complexity is reminiscent of a nominal phrase with decisive, assigning dependent components, in the second case, page 101].
Let's look at the directional research word combination, where the dependent components are the problems and what are the semantic features of the complications with the predominant components?
  The verb member, which is a compound, has such a syntactic relation with its subordinate component, as in ordinary word combinations.
such as have not been performed in comparison with the structures of the word combinations, which would allow the quantitative relations between the word compositions of the components of the word combinations to be accurately determined.
"Especially for Grabar, the work" Grabar Dictionaries "can be a great material for such a study," says L. Hovsepyan [4, p. 367].
  As we mentioned, the additions of the sentence, expressed by the verb, are divided into two big groups: problems և Supplies.
It is preferable to express the circumstances of the action with the components + the action with general templates.
  The additions related to the subjects are the problems, the additions related to the circumstances are the items.
provide related items + action related V. Kosyan complications արդ with the use of the general verb-basis և complex words, still-not possibleNoun part of the word + verb-based form-complex complications, which, based on the general word meaning expressed, S. Eloyan presents with the following grouping: complications expressing the name of the action, complications expressing the name of the actor, complications expressing the action as a feature [3, p. 333], expressing the relations after turning into a syntactic connection: problematic, case, subject.
Consider the complexities of the original verb with a participle according to the part of the noun in the form as a problematic relation to the basis of the verb.
  It should be noted that the study is based on the bibliographic vocabulary handed down to us from the 5th century, taken from the New Haykazian Dictionary.
  Relationship problem relation.
The first part of the pronoun of the complexity related to such a relation expresses the meaning of the tragic syllable, revealing mainly the meanings of reaching, approaching, embracing, touching, clinging to the celestial (d). , igatench (longing for the love of women), envy (envy with men), world-Armenian (who is an Armenian (devoted to Christ), my mixed world), christian (mixed with humanity), from the devil), (looking in the mirror), accustomed darkness) և etc.
Relationship problem relation.
  In such complexities, the nominative component denotes the person or object being spoken about, who is being acted upon, such as from worldview to world affairs), worldview (world historian), theologian (who speaks of God), moralist (who speaks of good or evil), dichotomous (heavenly (to the heavens and the heavenly council), ancient!
  In such cases, the meaning of the nominative exception is exceptional.
 As if the last component of the verb "to write" is "to write", to speak the verb "to speak" և "to tell" the verbs "to cover".
In complications, the nominal component indicates the object, the material from which it is composed, composed, another object is formed: luminaire (composed of light), clay-made (made of clay), side-built (built-by-side), earthen-created (e-created), mother-built (made of mother-of-pearl wood), marmarashen (made of marble), wax-made (made of imomo), gold sculpture (sculpted with gold), vimakert (made of stone), carpenter (actually made of wood), etc.
The nominal component expresses an exceptional connotation.
  In this template, the word-based verbs "build" of the verb "build" և "create" have an active word-forming function.
The relation of the problem to the means.
  In such cases, the nominative component indicates the object or person by which the action is performed on the basis of the verb. The component of the disease (filled with the disease of sin), the component of salt (expression of bricks) expresses the relation of the problem of population.
  Such as (to speak), cartilage (folded cartilage), sail (closed sail), embroidered (as if patched with asbestos), bloody (irrigated with blood), sandy (filled with sand), bambrasat (to play the harp) գանածեծ (գանիւք ծեծեալ), դարգճակալ (կեալն եւ տարեալն պաթագարակաւ), (պալեալ հօքված), երկաթակուրկաթնասնոյց (մատամ ցուցանող), նետահար (նետիւ հարեալ), փոշելից (փոսշով) - etc.
 In the complexity of the noun, the nominative component expresses the practical syllable, as the final components of the verb "lnul" "lits" և "patel" the verb "pat" are noticeably viable.
(wrought with iron), hilarious (nourishing with milk), meaningful.
  Note the template under consideration.
  In such complications, the preferred component indicates separation, disconnection, removal, separation, etc. The thoughtful / imagined (born in the mind), stone-cut (ikare bghgheal), tnank (the fallen from the greatness of the house), digger (in the digging), captive (to take out of captivity), childish (in the knowledge of the captives), deciduous (fallen and naked leaves) ), spontaneous (yelling from it), belted (dissolved in the belt), decapitated (spilled imardoy), dog (taken and stolen in the mouth of a dog) և etc.
  Complications formed by this template mainly express the feature of persons or objects being deprived of another object that concerns them, not having it.
 In the template under consideration, the alleged "basic" components are widely used: "to give birth" to the verb "to give birth" և to derive the verbs "to give birth".
The component is nominal (given by the king), wolf-eating.
  To perform the action expressed in the complexities based on the complexities formed by this pattern: aysahar (adjacent to this filthy one), a god-maker (made by God), a prince (eaten by a wolf), an emperor (written by an emperor), a patriarch (by a father-in-law) կարտեալ իշամիրամայ), վարդապետախօս (խոսեցեալ ի վարդապետէ), տիրախնամ (ի տեառնէ խնամեալ) և etc.
Let's present the complications in separate semantic groups. Direct problematic relation.
  With this template1. Ingredients, the first components of which refer to the endangered world. khashnaboyts (breeder khashants), ishavar (driver oshoy), fish-hunter (to cut my fish), eagle (to be cut), kozharats (pasture zkhozs), shnaser (lover zshnutyun), pigeon seller, pigeon seller (pigeon seller) lamb (parent lamb), ox-dish (eating zez), butcher (working meat in a pot).
2. Ingredients, the first components of which refer to the flora. grape-bearer (who brings play from it), lily-bearer (who brings lily of the valley), bee-eater (eater-eater), bee-eater (who brings, that is, plants to cultivate), wheat-bearer (which gives ztsorian), wheat (destructive wheat).
3. Compositions, the first components of which are various concepts related to different fields of art: composer (who takes out my song), theater lover (who loves to play a play), instrumentalist (who sings a song), novelist (writer of a song), legend (who brings ), art lover (florist), drummer (floor drummer).
4. Ingredients, the first components of which refer to the spiritual-religious sphere. God-seeker (whoever wants to find a god), paradise-opener (open to paradise), church-maker (blue-collar church), tabernacle (khorayayarmare khoran), angel-bearer (krogh yinkian angel-angels), mehenashen (killer) ), լատագամատոյցպատուիրանասերպատուիրանս), տարարոսազնին (զնիչ տարարիոս).
bring (as a preserver of your voice) that (hunt 5. Ingredients, the first components of which are words related to nature, the phenomena of nature: astrologer (star finder), sun-worshiper (who worships the sun as God), hailstorm (which flows with a hailstorm) , air conditioner (accepting oneself) և etc.
6. Ingredients, human-related նշանակ words that mean parts of the human body are: toothpick (to put to work), vein-cutter (their 1-injector), chest (banging breast), stntu (stins tuoghtus), to bring out
1st 7. Ingredients, the components of which are words showing family, blood-kinship, friendship ties. Brother-in-law (hateful brother), father-eater (foster mother), child-smoker (strangler of his child), niece (to leave a child), etc.
8) Ingredients, the first components of which are words that mean food, drink: gineber (to bring zgini), yughbugkh (orphan from yurt, fat or oil), honey (zgharghm) (honey) (from the time of the Jewish occupation) և etc.
9. Compounds, the first components of which are words denoting metals, mines. silver (silver), stone (stone), gold (with gold on it), copper (copper mining), iron (iron), etc.
Problem-manifold It should be added that the above-mentioned templates, with the exceptions of the nominal position component, are predominantly adjective.
The relationship between the's constituent's constituent's constituents is largely straightforward, such as toothpicker, bloodthirsty, artisan, vegetable seller, throne holder, lamb, winegrower, hairdresser, pharmacist, paperworker, crusader, baker, snowmobile.
  Often the verbal constituents have adjectives, such as theologian, theorist, lyricist, purse-bearer, calligrapher, glassmaker, butcher, astrologer, virgin, clergyman, depositor, illuminator, cabbage seller, idolater.
  Sometimes the adjective or noun form of a template is conditioned by the nature of the syntactic relation of the components. Thus, among the "solid" egg components, one can notice both a direct problematic relationship, a combination of the problematic population and the existential one. կռօղ քարանց, կռեալ ի քարանց.
  In the first case the template is noun, in the second case it is an adjective.
Conclusion.
  In factual study we came to the conclusion that among the real complexities composed on the basis of verbs they are widely used, expressing a direct problem-relationship. The problem-relations of means-disconnection stand out in terms of efficiency.
  It is the nature of the syntactic relation of adjective components from the overriding comparisons of parts of the word ահ other nouns that determines whether the adjective is adjective or noun.
templates to be made in cases.
the words.
