The aim of the work is to offer methods և approaches, through which it will be possible to make the course more easy to understand, attractive, interesting.
  To achieve all this, choose the most convenient tricks, taking into account the subject criteria, opportunities, training materials, available generalized professional thematic videos, various didactic materials and tools.
Literature, as provided by the textbook ևDue to the peculiarities of the course, we use the various games offered in the work to present the materials scientifically, accessibly, interestingly և, substantiating the relevance of the chosen topic.
 The suggested game-lessons have been tested many times in grades 2-4 and have been highly effective.
  The material processing and monitoring was done with the students of the 4th year of "Elementary Methodology" in the course "Science ակա the surrounding world".
The integrated course "I և the world around me" is designed to help the child recognize himself not only as an individual, but also as a member of society.
  With the help of the course, the primary school student begins to "build" his own world, drawing the circle of ideas, feelings, thoughts and preferences.
The purpose of the subject "I am the students around the world" taught in the 2nd-4th grades of elementary school is to get acquainted with nature, to communicate "to cooperate with the environment, to promote the realization of being the heir of the historical and cultural values ​​of one's own country".
rather, rich with lessons full of extensive information.
 That is why the material must be extremely attractive, scientifically accessible.
The course is difficult. In this case, the best methods become the best help for the teacher.
One of the easiest, most perceptible methods of serving is the game, which is one of the non-traditional forms of the class.
Play is the child's main activity.
Ս. L. Rubinstein noted that the game preserves and develops the childish in children, it is the school of their life - the development of practice.
The game is an activity that is done for fun, and is actually used as a learning tool.
  The game is not work, but the boundary between the game և work և is not clear, և some games are considered work ակը the opposite.
The game is also a model of life through which children get to know the "adult world".
Play pedagogy is a branch of pedagogy in which games are used in the pedagogical process.
The functions of pedagogical games are communicative, calming, self-expression.
The motivation for the game is the process itself, not the result.
Self-perception as a child is a means of self-expression.
Requirements for organizing the game: children's freedom and voluntary participation, keeping abreast of actions, knowing the rules and essence.
  An analysis is performed at the end of the game, after which the content and rules of the game can be reviewed.
The general picture of real games is as follows: • The game is characterized by competition, order, spontaneity, invention and freedom.
• The games consist of 3 rounds. Preparatory, game և end: defeat և victory, in this case, evaluation.
• Games introduce the rules of the game, as well as the intellectual, cognitive nature of the game [4].
The main purpose of the lessons of the 2nd grade of the course is to reveal the person, his preferences, goals, habits, his small and big family, the rules of coexistence.
 Recognize և show caring attitude to the environment, maintain ապրել live in harmony with nature և's components, how to learn about healthy food, hygiene, dangerous habits, be able to avoid infections, know the rules of the road.
responsibilities, the student should be able to introduce himself / herself in lessons 1-12.
For that, it is very convenient to create a "directory" with the title "Let's get acquainted".
 In each of the 6 sections on A4 size cardboard, the corresponding material is downloaded and cast.
  The work is done with the help of the teacher ովThe suggested sample (Fig. 1).
Job review կլինի Delivery will be in the last 1520 minutes of lesson 12, assessment can be done on the spot or at the beginning of the next meeting.
Figure 1. Handbook 1 “Let's Get Acquainted” (Sample pages 1 և 2).
The following topics, lessons 13-25, relate to the environment, plants, and animals.
Pre-selected pictures of plants and animals are needed.
 Give each of the students 1 picture of a plant or animal, it can be what the student knows or has chosen to carry out the game by the method of brainstorming.1. The plants will stand.
2. What are pets (What sounds do they make?) 3. Wild plants go to the right corner of the classroom, cultivated to the left.
4. Which plant is eaten the most in Armenia?
5. Let's separate. grass, shrub, tree - position at different heights (those with pictures of trees stand, accepting the bushes, sit on chairs, and those with grass, squat).
content over time, 6. Եւ ում Many such questions, the number of which is limited by the teacher's choice, based on the topic և class preparation.
The game method lesson is very expedient when organizing the topic summary, lesson 25.
  It is desirable to evaluate with all the factors: the fastest, the most accurate, the most active և etc.
  This will inspire the classroom to be more motivated and more willing to participate in the future.
Lesson 30 should be conducted with a small presentation.
Create a crossroads with classroom tables, put up a traffic light ելDo the distribution of roles. pedestrians (children, students, adults, etc.), police, drivers.
  After receiving the assignment, each one waits for the instruction that the teacher reads from the short story he or she wrote for the lesson Զ Safety։.
  This game will be supported by the "Little Policeman" video game available in schools.
"Ով We are approaching the big intersection of Factory Street in Mush 2 district with our class…".
  The difficulty is that the hunting script must be well-developed, concise, specific, with simple sentences, to all performers, which will ensure interest, attention, learning and application of traffic rules.
 The summary of this lesson will be during the final դաս excursion lessons (lessons 31, 32).
It is already easier to organize the games for the separate topics of the 3rd grade, based on the experience gained in the previous year.
For lessons 1-9, it is planned to create the second part of the "Let's get acquainted" handbook compiled in the first grade, "Imaroryan", which will be handed over and evaluated during lesson 18, during the repetition lesson.
Your approach is the same.
 This time the student will want to be more full and versatile. I am not alone.
My classmates.
My daily life.
I like when եմ I do not like when… My interests.
Each of these titles will be completed by the student before the day of the repetition lesson և և will be given to the teacher for assessment or summarizing the results.
  The mentioned titles are obligatory, they are chosen based on the students' preferences, the general preparation of the class, but it is obligatory to keep 6 points in the number of pages in order to keep the size of the book "Let's get acquainted" (book 1).
In order to increase the interest in the work, it is possible to introduce different approaches to the incentive attitude. beautiful և correct formation, the most interesting solution և etc.
Creating a "Victor Universe" stand for the whole class is a very good way for lessons 10-12.
 Self-adhesive pictures of Whatman A1 size, dark blue վերաբեր stars, meteors, meteorites, planets: Sun, Earth, Moon, etc. should be attached to the wall in a convenient, well-visible place in the classroom.
  Create a handmade universe from lesson to lesson with the help of a teacher.
  To encourage, allow students to have a star with their picture posted in their preferred location.
By creating a wall paper, you can also conduct lessons on "Different seasons of nature" (Fig. 2).
Discussion of the 2 wall papers again during lesson 18.
 It is possible to present joint works, such as class work.
Photo 2. Photo-exhibition: "We, plants and animals during the seasons" (the sequence is conditioned by the weather shift of the school year).
The lessons included in the 4th grade textbook contain a large amount of material in terms of teaching in scientific terms. Teaching requires a huge amount of work.
The student's achievements include the deepening and development of students' logical thinking in one of the important tasks of the educational process.
  Logic trains the learner's mind, helps them to overcome various obstacles.
Ingenuity, the ability to orient in difficult situations, the ability to think creatively, perform "discovery".
  Along with mastering the given material, there is a need to acquire independent knowledge.
  It is these skills that need to be further enhanced when delivering the course materials.
 The advantage is the availability of hours that can be used for a comprehensive presentation of individual topics [2].
doubling, spare time map competitions, quizzes. Depending on the topics, it is advisable to organize a series of games, trips, open lessons, thematic painting exhibitions.
  It is more convenient to refer to the work of organizing these lessons in the future with a separate new article, which will provide a more detailed overview of the topics of the 4th grade, based on the topics of the course.
with a performance.
  So far, for example, when crossing the planet Earth, the main landforms, continents, oceans, it is advisable to choose the method of team competition-game with questions corresponding to the lessons, pictures, stages with other content.
The questions should cover the whole topic, the pictures (rebuses), refer to the main terms ություններինconcepts.
They are also interesting: "Who is faster?", "Guess the continent," Find the middle ", the ocean, organized in other stages", and holding geographical game-quizzes [1].
Introduce bodies, materials, their characteristics from the selected pile of objects by grouping according to the teacher's instructions.
Classroom stands will help with lessons on economics, its branches and sub-branches, and minerals.
Summarize the lessons "Armenia is my homeland" with "Let's Build Armenia" game-competition in several stages. Find the region with a micro-descriptive quatrain, put it in its place, dislodge a number of toponyms or their pictures - historical and cultural monuments, famous people, the picture of the most characteristic branch or product of the economy typical of the region, etc.
Use "Captain-Commander", "Back to Magellan" »other travel-related themes for travel-related information: maps of travelers' journeys, pictures of ships, travelers, etc. [1].
When using the Internet արդ When summarizing the lessons Human-Society-Relationships, apply the method of thematic painting exhibition or role-play with the scenario suggested by the teacher.
After all this, bringing together the necessity of using the game method, one should remember the words of the great pedagogues. "There is no game without և there can be no full mental development.
The game is a huge, bright window, through which the child's mental world is filled with the fire of notions, ideas, curiosity and curiosity about the world around him. ”
the flood.
  Playing the game, V. A. Sukhomlinsky On the educational significance of the game Makarenko noted that the child should always play, even if he does a very serious job.
The game develops the presence, creative abilities, promotes the formation and development of independence, activates the attention and logic, expands the worldview.
The child's play is accompanied by speech.
Games to increase the efficiency of the educational process.
  They make the lesson auspicious ավ remarkable.
  A working mood is created, the process of acquiring knowledge and skills becomes easier.
In the educational process of the junior high school, but it should not be overestimated and the lesson turned into a game.
Thus, the right, well-chosen methods can be used to provide a high level of knowledge about the world around us, through which it is possible to convey even the most complex, large-scale materials in an easily perceptible way of life.
The choice of the method of the game makes the teaching of the course "the surrounding world" just like that, creating practical opportunities with which the junior grade students will be more valuable, preserve and love nature ությունները the opportunities it gives.
