Preface.
 A person spends most of his life on his feet, walking, running, playing sports, dancing, standing, etc.
 Therefore, the health of the feet (lower limbs) determines a person's success in this or that activity.
Depending on the condition of the lower limbs, in particular the foot, not only the condition of the feet, but also the general well-being and health.
Violation of the correct structure of the foot, which is manifested by a decrease or absence of the curvature of the arch of the foot, leads to a disease such as flat feet or flat feet.
A foot-like defect can be congenital or acquired.
Of the various types of acquired flatfoot: rickets, paralysis, trauma և static, most often in 82% of cases the last type is static [3,7].
  It occurs very often in children because their musculoskeletal system is poorly developed.
Due to the incomplete development of the latter, the arch of the foot decreases, its inhibitory function significantly decreases.
  As a result, the tremors that occur when walking, running, jumping, and performing other movement activities are not mitigated, which has a negative effect on the vertebral joints of the lower extremities [5, 6].
  As a result, pains appear in the mentioned areas, such as headaches, fatigue, malaise, etc.
Completely difficult.
  Flatfoot երեխաների Flat feet are a very common disorder և occur in children, respectively, in 15-25% և 39% of cases [3].
  Therefore, as soon as these disorders appear in the foot, it is necessary to take preventive and corrective measures in order to prevent physical diseases.
  The increase of the efficiency of their use is conditioned by the fact that sports specialists and parents of children with problems are involved in this process.
  For the proper organization of such cooperation, it is necessary to develop appropriate mechanisms, which are very relevant ենThe purpose of this study.
The study of literary sources only by means of physical culture, as well as our researches, showed that a large number of children have such or such disorders in their feet.
  For example, some of the 65 children (8-12 years old) who attended swimming health groups had violations in the motor feet of some of them, due to which their parents included them in swimming clubs.
 About 35 (54%) of the subjects were diagnosed with various degrees of flat feet, of which 8 (23%) had 3rd degree flat feet, diagnosed by a doctor.
In order to correct such violations, it was necessary to develop an appropriate program, to assess the effectiveness of which a pedagogical experiment was conducted with children aged 11-12 included in experimental-test groups.
  The groups included 3 children with 3rd degree flatness, the violation index of which was 2.13 on average.
 In addition, 5 children with dementia with an average of 1.34 points participated in the experiment.
  The Violation Rating Index was determined by Chizhin's method.
The developed program was implemented by swimming coaches and parents, whose children had violations in their feet.
  The latter conducted the exercises at home.
Before the implementation of the program, there was a need to find out about the coaches և parents գիտ knowledge և practical skills through a sociological survey.
 The survey was conducted by the citizens of Yerevan for at least 6 years, և 50 parents, whose children had violations in their feet.
Swimming pool level trainers, so-called problem series The analysis of the survey results showed that non-users can objectively and fully assess the condition of their children's feet.
  Only 32% of the respondents assessed the condition of their child's foot as bad, and half of them came to that conclusion as a result of the doctor's diagnosis.
  The reason for this conclusion was the violations in the feet of most of the children.
Studies show that only 22% of parents can solve their baby's problems on their own.
  However, this group of parents can only describe the group exercises that can be used to correct the disorders.
27% were able to apply the knowledge of the coaches at the right level.
Flat feet, flat feet Questions Only 28% of the coaches knew how to assess the condition of the foot.
  To the question of what exercises are used to correct violations during swimming lessons, the answers of all the respondents were the same: swimming exercises used in swimming exercises are a self-preventive միջոց corrective measure.
 However, such an approach is not so cost-effective, as the use of these exercises alone is not enough to effectively correct the shortcomings of the feet in a relatively short period of time.
 Meanwhile, there are a number of exercises that need to be used to correct the problems.
It should be noted that the process of correcting foot violations will be more effective if it is carried out jointly by "coaches" and "parents".
In order to bring the knowledge of the latter to a proper level, it became necessary to conduct seminars on correcting the violations in the feet.
  In addition, during the pedagogical experiment (duration: half a year) each was given the group exercises և methodical instructions that were to be used at home և in the pool.
Exercises in the post-pool of the control group according to the procedure accepted in practice.
  The content of the trainings was the swimming exercises used in the swimming process.
For children, it is carried out in addition to general methodological instructions.
In the experimental group, the exercises were held in the pool, according to the exercises offered by us - swimming exercises, a group of exercises was also performed. For example, by standing on the floor of the pool, you can make "vibrating" movements with your feet from the position, moving forward.
  In the next exercise, touch the wall of the pool with your back, hold the wall or the pool with your hands;
In addition, the children in this group performed special correction exercises three times a week at home under parental supervision on days when they were not in the pool.
  The purpose of the latter was to reduce the level of the foot bridge ո to correct the deformation.
As a result of performing the exercises, the muscles of the lower extremities were strengthened, which contributed to the deepening of the longitudinal and transverse arches.
  In the initial stages of training, the exercises are performed in such a way that the contractions of the muscles are followed by their relaxation, mainly in the lying-sitting position.
 Exercises such as walking on the toes, heels, and on the outer edge with parallel foot placement were widely used.
  It was recommended to do the exercises with barefoot or soft shoes.
  Steps turned with the feet out of the inner edge were excluded, as the effect of gravity falls with full force on the arch of the foot [8, 4, 1].
We conducted plantographic studies among the participants of the research groups on the effectiveness of the program used in the pedagogical scientific experiment.
For the purpose of evaluation, the analysis of the research results (Table 1) revealed that the changes in the experimental group are more significant.
  For example, if in the experimental group the index of flat feet of the right foot decreased by 0.18 points as a result of a scientific experiment, then in the test it changed by 0.06 points.
 Similar changes were registered in the indicators of the left, respectively, 0.11 և 0.07 points.
In the experimental group of the data of the subjects with flat feet, no tendency to deepen the flatness was observed, in contrast to the test.
The analysis showed that the changes in the experimental group were of a more significant positive nature, as evidenced by the percentage ratios of the children's foot flatness in the experimental group.
  Thus, the index before the scientific experiment was 58.3% on average, after the apoptosis it was equal to 49.2%.
 In the control group, the indicators were 57.8% և 54.3%, respectively.
In fact, the improvement was 9.1% in the experimental group and 3.5% in the test group.
Foot condition before the experiment (MG) հետոAfter the experiment (SC) (Experimental (P) և Test (S) Table 1. Indicators Foot conditionT * H ** PSPGroups (X) Foot arch index (points) Right-left Գ * T: flat foot, ** H: flat foot.
Conclusion.
 Summarizing the results of the research, it can be concluded that the violations registered in the feet, whether in the form of flat feet or flat feet, can be corrected with great efficiency as much as possible. The joint efficiency of the coaches and parents was substantiated by the pedagogical experiment developed by our program.
  with efforts.
  Such cooperation In order for the developed program to be effectively applied in practice, it is necessary to increase the level of theoretical knowledge and practical skills of parents և swimming coaches on the above-mentioned issues.
 Such a result can be achieved if the relevant structures at the state level in general education institutions, sports, children and youth methodological centers, centers, clubs develop advisory manuals for the relevant methodological centers of those centers, can receive advice on the issues under discussion.
