The essence of a human being, on the one hand, conditioned by the specific present, on the other hand, regardless of all situations. These thoughts are the basis of the article, as an examination of Zorayr Khalapyan's "Golden Mean" novel.
  The work is called a story.
In general, many works of this author have appeared in the center of attention of literary critics.
  Although as a separate study topic within the framework of the article, it is one of the first attempts.
  The analytical, analytical-comparative methods chosen for the examination gave an opportunity to notice the psychological, philosophical aspects of human nature, on which the author put the emphasis.
  Through the second, the pictorial expressions of the novel were revealed, which gave an opportunity to interpret the writer's words, revealing the artistic value of the work.
  Relevant quotes will confirm what has been said.
  These are just some of the goal setting shareware that you can use.
"Մի A huge mountain of gold.
 The price of human blood, suffering, deprivation is nothing.
  Who needs it? Why? ”[1], - Zorayr Khalapyan expresses his thoughts with a rhetorical question, and with a sincere desire to create a complete opposition, we present the famous thought of Jean-Paul Sartre" Man is doomed to freedom ".
  Why, because it is precisely such seemingly and seemingly illogical antagonisms that the "accidental" patterns of human life are based, something that is expressed in the novel.
A very different or unrepeatable species: Where was the real human mission in this life, to be a HUMAN being, to be preserved for at least one moment, a cosmic moment?
  Who is the man?
  Man in society, man in nature, man in himself, within himself.
  In one case, man as the free child of nature, in spirit, physically, but first of all in spirit, in another case, man as a social being, in endless unequal struggle again with nature and his like, ի, finally, with human-lifestyle, worldview, thought and contemplation, a creation that lives independently of the influences of the world around us.
  And the "types" of living Z. Under the pen of the Khalapian prose writer, they take on a different spirit, differing from the others in particular and with no more, no less… smiles, especially on the neck.
  Already later, in the last parts of the work, it becomes clear what the three types of completely smiling smiles growing and flourishing on the human neck are worth. "The head of the prison emptied his glass and the wrinkles on his neck smiled with three different smiles. one happy, the other with a smile, the youngest almost contemptuous.
Եռ The three-tiered wrinkles on the neck were smiling in a new arrangement: the top was happy, the middle was sad, the bottom was smiling, as always.
  When the warden shook his head, the arrangement of smiles changed. The one who smiled started to grieve, the one who grieved started to smile, only the one who smiled remained unchanged.
  The smiles of the movement started a new performance.
  Everyone knew about those strange smiles. even standing behind him, they made their faces look respectable, because the smiles were watching, especially the one who smiled "[1], վերջ, finally, the neck looks more cheerful than his face, something that is known to both the reader and even the owner of the neck. It happens only in the last parts of the case, unfortunately.
  Here, why did he smile on his neck? Isn't this far from logical allusions?
  It is true.
  But, after all, the "prison" neck can only smile, in three types, never the lips.
  After all, a blossoming smile on his lips could be very human.
  Undoubtedly, the writer needed to give a strictly human-non-human psychological description of all the heroes, necessarily psychological from the point of view of the border situation.
Speaking from time to time about the heroes of the prose writer's works, the description of him, the only hero of all literary works, a man, was emphasized.
In this respect, the case of the writer under consideration is no exception.
  Only in this case the chosen situation is exceptional, exceptional, but again life կյան very human.
The next group of prisoners, breaking through the impassable layers of snow, is taken to one of the northern glaciers to deliver to the state treasury the precious mineral, gold, which was born from the earth's crust.
 Here, in this infinite world, epic events unfold.
 In the face of ugly and inhuman, unconditionally unrepeatable destinies, the huge bar of gold, even the impossible, the weightless, is devalued, because in those conditions every human life is worthless three times… “They dig a grave, gold comes out.
  Who needs it?
  Where they dig, gold comes out.
  … Insufficient wealth, to cover the price of ten big cities with a dream and sit by his shovel.
  He dug a grave for the poorest man in the world, gold came out.
  A strong vein covered with sand.
  They will lay the poor man in cloth clothes on individual wealth.
 A burial worthy of Pharaoh. "[1]
Of course, the words are not used extravagantly, the "most brilliant" vocabulary is not chosen, but isn't it more eloquent in this way than it would be otherwise?
  This is, of course, one of the artistic features of this great work of the writer.
  British philosopher Ջ. This is what Collingwood means, noting: "… Even the use of adjectives in the broadcast, where the goal is expressiveness, is dangerous." [5]
Many philosophical thoughts are expressed in the work, sometimes only in the form of reflection, sometimes in dialogues.
"They settled as in life. according to strength, weakness, prudence, foolishness, honesty and dishonesty.
  Ությունը The society was balanced.
  And it was balanced in such a way that injustice arose. "[1]
But in the end, what is the value of human life, given only once, when the catastrophe of one nature (in this case, avalanches), sometimes the same human-human relations (prisoner-prisoner, then prisoner, turned into a guard soldier), from different perspectives, the most inhuman justifications protection of one's own way of working by applying, on the other hand, an imminent disease, perhaps an epidemic with ominous-deadly spots appearing on the body.
How strong must man be to resist the three-headed-multi-headed monster, to which he inevitably joins his inner, perhaps more cruel than all, ruthless and archenemy enemy, that is, where the real and the imaginary are mixed.
  Strength of struggle, the only goal is one, the only goal is to keep the MAN inside.
Always "Mines do not give anything… Gold is gone, there is no more ենք
  It is cruelty, it must be enjoyed, what is its job to dig up empty soil ”[1].
  "Enjoyable" cruelty is directly opposed to the writer, for all times, regardless of any situation, love for "the seed, satire, humor without evil և sarcasm" [2]. This is the true, characteristic line by which the Enkhalapyan pages stand out.
  Let's bring only one example. "… This is what the detainees said, that they were also people" [1].
"Mines were coming down before dawn, the prisoners did not see the light.
  The wooden stairs seemed to lead the caravan.
  It was filled with people under the ground.
  Floor to floor, right and left, up and down, people were moving in all directions, tangled, lost, lost inside the mountain, flowing like blood in its veins.
 They come out of the mines when it is already dark.
  They enter in the dark, they leave in the dark.
  Somewhere the day disappears, and the nights cling to each other, և life becomes icy, a ribbon.
  The tape is pulled very slowly.
Small lights on the ribbon. hot water, bedding, cigarette butts.
  It is not strange that people run away.
  It is even more natural for them to run away.
 It is not strange that the fugitives are caught and punished.
 It would be unnatural not to be caught and punished. "[1]
The guards (even the jailer can be saddened by a torn butterfly). In fact, this is a fight between those imprisoned inside closed mountains.
In this case, regardless of status, all are prisoners with handcuffs of nature և disease.
  "Sometimes I wonder if the prisoner himself is free, the other prisoner does not imprison himself.
  After all, you have to control it, that is, you have to hold the gun in his hand.
  Aren't we so exiled for so many years? ”[1], - are the words of the prison warden, truly true, logically and humanely accurate, as surprising as it may seem. "Ենք Why do we torment each other, what do we want from each other, why do we not let each other live and breathe.
  After all, man tortures a human being, not some supernatural being.
  In the end, man fights, fights, wars against man, instead of uniting against the common enemy, the disasters of nature, we destroy each other. "[1]
Zorayr Khalapyan is a searching author.
 His prose stands out with its richness of material and variety of style.
 F. Khalapyan is characterized by the dramatic, inner tension of the story ("Where were you, man of God?"), The tragic breath ("Chamomile leaves"), the irony ("And returning your portrait"), and the everyday thought.
F. Khalapyan raises a number of topical questions of general value, giving the reader an opportunity to both argue and ponder. ”[See 4].
Here, only one line in the case mentions that it is a road, which is only for one person.
  The transparent hint of the self-evident writer, with a simple context, the way out is only for one HUMAN.
  And isn't it natural that someone, perhaps the smallest of the souls, the last one who lost his human soul, stays in the prison-prison, not knowing himself as a guard or as a prisoner, as if he is forever frozen in the world of gold?
And the state of the psychological slave (enslaved) spirit deserves special attention and appreciation. When prisoners suddenly notice that they are out of control, they are terrified.
 Why?
 The work is both situational and psychological.
  And these two are completely balanced in terms of volume.
  And many pictures come to enrich, but never to aggravate the completeness of the work.
  The story is complete և make the pictorial expressions visible, which are clear and sensitive like the light of an eye.
"The bell rang and made a broken sound, no-noo, that in the cold, icy air, like heavy stones, the windows of the cell were thrown to the end." [1] In the picture, even the sound sensation is tangible.
  By the way, for comparison, let us mention that the art of smoothly transmitting that nuance of the writer's voice to the reader finds its continuation in the future.
  In particular, a small quote is from 1976. From the book "Warm Comfort".
  "After squealing the TV several times and informing all the big and small children in the area that he was approaching, the smoke was finally coming out of the pond and the sound of the erupting heat could be heard. "Pakpak-pak…" was thrown up with each "pak" ["[3].
It should be noted that the writer's comparisons are a kind of "cosmic" or are smoothly connected with celestial bodies.
Let's compare. "His naked, shaved head moved like a sliding moon through the clouds to the table" [1] և "In the blue-and-white sky, the stars shone with medieval taste like precious stones, and again it seemed as if the world was the ancient world when the earth ended,, the sky descended like a plate , covers it.
 The bucket of the Big Dipper was completely tilted, and the silence of the cosmos was on the ground.
  In the open light, like in transparent ice, the crystalline stars "[1].
Everything was there: people, buildings, sky. When examining the following sections, megot landscapes look so natural, almost equivalent to a picture. "The rays of the sun hung from the layer of foliage in layers.
  It looks like a sack that encloses with a drawstring.
  And the smoke rises, it turns into a blue board, the mist rises, it turns into a yellow board "[1], or" Under the forest ", in the gorge, pushing the banks with its elbows this way, the river flows.
  Several trees were uprooted, went down the gorge with the ruin, and stood on the river bank.
  It is as if they came to drink water, they are waiting for no one to watch, they are lowering their heads. "[1]
 In another "picture" the feeling of cold and fresh air at dawn is expressed, naturally, necessarily closely connected with the human factor, moreover, the conventional role is given to the human being to be influenced by the natural environment. "The dawn in the east" [1] և "The forest.
 The trees are frozen in the frozen air like in an ice crystal.
  Snow.
  Cleanliness, silence, immobility.
The axes crackle, the saws snort.
  Blue, pure carbon spreads in immobility.
  Flaking the world, the flakes go down.
  People are covered with snow, they turn to stone "[1].
After all, the same people become the victims of that same natural environment, nature's human greed.
 Here is the proof from the case: "The underground world has two significant events. collapse խոշոր large-scale discovery of gold.
  In the first case, the world loses nothing (a couple of people), in the second case, the world gains a large chunk of gold.
 Gold is permanent, man is not ”[1].
In conclusion, the work presents on the one hand the human-human, human-society relations, on the other hand, these same relations, in addition to the uniqueness of destinies in different situations, including the psychological borderline state, when even in spontaneous imagination one does not imagine how to express himself both psychologically and in other ways.
 Concentrates, makes the writer's pictorial expressions more visible, deep.
