Collaborative learning is widespread in the world.
 It is being used more and more as a working, teaching-learning new approach և strategy.
Collaborative learning is the highest level of group work, which implies the formation of a certain norm of culture of group work.
  It provides opportunities to achieve a variety of educational goals, such as the development of academic event skills.
  The best example of modern teaching practice is small group work, the roots of which can be found in the work of sociologists and modern educators [3,4].
  Small group work is sometimes referred to as collaborative learning, collaborative learning, or social learning.
 There are different methods of collaborative learning that are used at different stages of the lesson.
  The interpersonal perception of these concepts and principles, in the middle of which the students are involved in a process where they make information, make choices and make decisions.
  These include Student Team Progress, Mosaic, Turn to Couple, Prism, Group Exam, Gallery Tours, and more.
In this article we will try to present the scientific and pedagogical experience of the countries with advanced educational systems (USA, Russia, Britain) in the development of the theory of cooperation and practical applications.
 Based on the "previous elaborations" of modern pedagogical theories, a means of promoting the participation of "several methods" will be presented on the example of a specific lesson.
First of all, we are interested in the question of whether possible correlation, personal responsibility, face-to-face interaction, social skills, group cooperation ideas through the applicability of the elements of collaborative learning և means.
  Accordingly, the approaches of David ոջ Roger Johnson, Passy Sahlberg և others were considered.
In this paper, we want to reflect on the effectiveness of the use of collaborative tools proposed by reform և To what extent is the proposed experience conducive to the development of these skills?
The development of students is changing the world unpredictably.
 Information and knowledge shape our worldview.
All social changes affect the education system.
At a fast pace in Armenia, as is obvious all over the world, people need to work in groups.
Rapid change requires people to adapt to new situations and to be flexible.
The society has authorized the school, especially the teacher, to reflect on the practical methods, tricks and small-scale applicability of work.
The use of collaborative methods is not an end in itself. creating them.
  In order to be effective in this work, the groups must be focused on the development of learners' mental and emotional abilities, as well as independence, socialization and other skills.
  [2] The most important task is not only to master these skills, but also to value and apply them in appropriate situations in life.
Therefore, our task is to develop such qualities in students through the teaching of history lessons, to develop skills that will be in line with the modern requirements of education, and the graduate will be able to apply what he has acquired in the educational institution in life.
In this paper we will talk about the effectiveness of one of the various means promoted by Sahlberg's participation, the work of couples, the "Turn to your couple" - the "Prism" method used by many - և.
The teacher cannot use the rich arsenal of methods at once, during one lesson.
  He must follow the teaching method of a certain class, make a choice.
  The teaching method is based on the problems that are solved at a certain stage of the lesson or class. In addition to the purpose and objectives of the lesson, the choice of methods depends on: • the type and structure of the lesson, • the content of the teaching material, • the age of the students, • the number of students in the class, • the level of preparation, • the interest and interest; from the level of teacher training և other factors [1].
The use of elements of collaborative learning contributes to the creation of a new collaborative environment in the classroom, helps the teacher to understand collaborative learning and lesson planning, and creates the conditions for assessing and evaluating learning effectiveness as it improves group work.
Figure 1 ․ Elements of Collaborative Training The main task of the teacher-teacher organization will be to supervise and direct the work of all groups.
  Each lesson և grade is unique, so one of the indicators of teacher training is the choice of the appropriate method.
Collaborative advantages.
Collaborative learning has gained great recognition as an alternative pedagogical approach.
 Not only academic knowledge սովոր learning skills are essential in collaborative learning, but also co-developmental development of co-workers (active collaborative knowledge (thinking skills).
  The meaning of collaborative learning is skills (to become skilled through work) to make each individual a strong person in modern society.
Դարձ Make the individual active և be able to be a member of the group ելու collaborate [3].
If we simply offer students to work together, it does not mean that dividing them into groups has led to effective cooperation.
  Not all group work can provide collaborative learning.
 There are many cases when the group's efforts to carry out the general task are not fruitful.
The task, the method is planned, implemented in a way that motivates the learner to cooperate, promotes his / her active participation in the learning process.
The advantages of working in small groups.
Groups are very important in collaborative learning.
  Groups of 4-5 people are considered to be the most effective.
  In such groups, students have the opportunity to be more active.
  The individual responsibility of each student is used in four groups of students, at the same time an atmosphere of collective work is created.
  The size of the group depends on the purpose of the lesson and the method chosen.
  Working in small groups significantly increases the student's activity in the lesson process.
 It is obvious that it is not possible to learn effectively only by being an observer, a listener, being in a passive state.
  The student learns better when he actively participates in the process.
 Small group teaching is used in the sense that as a result of the increase in the density of students in the classrooms, it is significantly more difficult to use frontal learning quizzes.
 When the teacher works with the (large) class, the students have less opportunities to express themselves, to discuss.
  In a small group, those opportunities are much greater.
  Teaching in small groups has the following goals: [1] ․ • develops problem-solving skills, • develops communication skills, • learns from each other, • develops students' sense of responsibility, • is accountable for ensuring overall group success, • fosters teamwork • Creates a safe, conducive environment for the expression of knowledge and skills; • Strengthens students' beliefs through discussions; • Provides active participation ություն Self-expression.
Today, in most public schools, the class density is 20-25 (in some places, 30-34).
  Not all schools have adequate furniture and conditions.
There are no mobile tables in the classrooms, accessories for group work, communication, video recorder, electronic whiteboard, etc.
  Therefore, we suggest using the "Turn to your partner" method in history classes with more than 20 students.
 This method allows you to avoid unnecessary noise, movement and clutter during the lesson.
  The working position is "eye to eye", "face".
  Those who are face to face can easily see and hear each other.
  Communication is done through words and eyes.
Here students can be asked at random to get their answers after each discussion.
  Such individual responsibility makes the couple more alert. The students take the task more seriously. Checking each other to make sure that both of them are ready to answer or not.
  This method allows the teacher to walk around the classroom freely, give individual instructions, show a separate approach to the groups.
At this time the work noise is manageable, the work groups do not interfere with each other.
  Consider the method with the example of a specific lesson: Grade - 9th Subject - World History Number of students in the class - 22 Topic - Totalitarian regimes in Europe Introducing the lesson plan in sequential steps1. Instruct students to form a group, turning to the couple.
  11 pairs are formed. In this case, a working group in the classroom.
2. Divide the materials to be studied into groups - The content of totalitarianism (p. 27) - The emergence of fascism (p. 27-28) - Fascism in Italy (p. 28-29) - National Socialism in Germany (p. 29-31) National Socialism in Germany (continued, p. 31) - Working with the source (p. 32) The study of the same subtopic is done in pairs), only the last pair works with the source 32 of the textbook.
  The couple is given an analysis questionnaire compiled by the teacher.
4 student themes (that is, the same groups must first study the assigned section, discuss, exchange ideas.
 The groups will be evaluated according to their preferred presentation (explanation, diagram, diagram, table, etc.).
 Given during work.
Աշխատանքը The group work will present the student selected by the teacher (this allows all the students in the group to be ready).
Յուր The students' mastery of the material will be tested by a teacher-made diagnostic test task related to the whole class.
Descriptive Test Grade 9 - Topic 9 - Totalitarian regimes in Europe Number of tasks - 101. When was the National Socialist Party of Germany founded? A) 1918 b) 1919 c) 1922 d) 1933 2. When was fascism established as a ruling party in Italy? a) 1918 b) 1919 c) 1922 d) 1933 3. When did fascism come to power in Germany? A) 1918 b) 1919 c) 1922 d) 1933 4. When was the fascist dictatorship established in Italy? a) 1922 b) 1933 c) 1936 d) 1934 5. Which of the following countries is not totalitarian? a) USSR b) Italy c) Spain d) France 6. The President of Germany Paul von Hindenburg appointed the Reichskatsel of Germany as Prime Minister in January 1933 --------------.
7. Racism is based on the principle of dividing nations "բարձր" ---------------- ".
8. In 1922, King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy -------------- appointed Prime Minister.
9. Match the names to the countries1. Franco a) Hungary 2. Calf b) Portugal 3. Antonski c) Spain 4. Salazar d) Romania 10 ավորել Arrange the events in chronological order: a) The formation of the Berlin-Rome axis b) The dawn (unification) of Austria evaluation of a couple or individuals.
Research results ․ In the 9th grade "a", where 22 students study, while studying the topic "Totalitarian regimes in Europe" we got the following results: "9" points - 6 students "8" points - 5 students "7" points - 4 students "6" points -3 students "5" points -3 students "4" points -1 students In the 6th "a" grade, where 28 students study, "Studying the topic" Kingdom of the Artashesyans of Greater Armenia "we got the following results:" 9 "points - 7 students" 8 " points -6 students "7" points -7 students "6" points-3 students "5" points-3 students "4" points -2 students in 9th "b" grade, where the number of students is 24 students studying "Corruption" We got the following results.
 It is a simple way to make the process of prism thinking figurative.
 The method does not take much time, it passes very quickly։ lively [1].
  The description of the method suggests that it is advisable to use it in the class promotion phase, but in history lessons the method works more effectively when summarizing new material, reviewing or summarizing old material in the next lesson, for example, if students do not understand totalitarian or totalitarian regimes, racism, racism. It will take a lot of effort from the teacher ներկայացնել to present new ideas through the students.
  The method was used in the middle class at the end of the lesson, during the reflection, and in the parallel class, in the first stage of the lesson, during the search and reinforcement of the old material.
  In both cases, the active participation of the students was ensured.
  It turned out to be an interesting three-layer prism.
  Of course, this is not the first time the method has been used, so it is desirable to use it repeatedly to increase its efficiency and effectiveness.
 The above-mentioned method has been used many times in the 6th-9th grades of social studies in the 1st basic school of Artik city, Shirak region.
can not have defects after registering the method of history մChart 2 ․ Three-layer open prism Conclusion.
 In the 6th grade, the method was used to study the topic "Artashesian Kingdom of Greater Armenia" in Armenian History, և the qualitative progress was 71%.
The proposed method is more advanced in the study of dynastic histories.
  2. In the 9th grade, when studying the topic of "World Sovereignty in Europe" in World History, the qualitative progress was 68%.
  It can be said that the mentioned method is highly effective, it is effective for high school students.
3. When studying the topic of "Corruption" from the subject "Social Science", the qualitative progress was 67%.
 The method is effective in studying cases and events.
  The application of the methods in the 6th-9th grades of the basic school made it possible to conclude that it was effective in teaching "Social Sciences" subjects.
