In the context of conflicting understandings of today's world order, conflict continues to be a phenomenon that exists in all dimensions of social time (past, present, future).
  The topic of the conflict is urgent, because the person living today, regardless of the formula of "complex tolerance" declared since the beginning of the current era, is struggling, rebelling, aggression not only to the outside world, but also to his own person.
  Modern man is more than conflicted, first of all, towards himself.
  Internal Conf 516 PHILOSOPHY The challenge of emphasizing the importance of lict is the image of modern society and the person who is considered an integral part of it.
  The latter is in conflict.
  Why is there a conflict and what are the internal guidelines for ensuring the survival of the conflict?
  The purpose of this article is to identify the stimuli that play a role in the formation and development of internal conflict.
  Historical-comparative, descriptive and comparative methods have been chosen as methodological bases for revealing invisible motives that promote human conflict.
 Previously, the study of the problem took place in the field of philosophy, but only in sections.
  In contrast, the conclusions made in this analysis, the conclusions made in the sense of a simultaneous examination of each other and their combination, are presented as novelties in the form of provisions.
 Attempts to make sense of conflict discourse date back to antiquity.
  In the history of philosophy, Heraclitus was, in fact, the first to speak of the need for conflict, noting that any movement contained change.
 Considering the existence of all phenomena possible due to the constant clash and struggle of the opposite principles in them, he declares: "... war is the father and king of everything ..." [1, p. 230].
  The ancient philosopher, in fact, proclaims the idea of ​​change, opposition (war) and the naturalness of the conflict arising from them, claiming that the nature of every being is conflict-born.
 Meditating on this subject from a philosophical point of view definitely leads us to man and his nature.
 Conflict discourse, in essence, revolves around the philosophical question of how a person has feelings inherent in him and communicates with the world and has innate presuppositions.
  The process of self-knowledge is the very first conflict, when a person, looking at himself, encounters his inner world and the reality outside him.
  517 PHILOSOPHY The examination of the complete disclosure of the contradiction inherent in human nature should perhaps be connected with a comprehensive examination of the well-known principle of "Know thyself."
  Conflict exists when there is opposition.
  And the opposite lives in each of us.
 Note that reflections on conflict discourse are not limited to the philosophical discipline.
  Being interested in one side or the other of the conflict, the subject becomes a research object for specialists in biology, psychology, pedagogy, political science, culture, history, sociology.
  Excluding the variety of textbook definitions, by content conflict we can understand the conflict of motivations, views, goals, needs, positions, interests, which are opposite and mutually exclusive.
  It is important to understand that in the conflict, the latter play a decisive role in the fact that the latter are completely different, mutually exclusive and not just different from each other.
 The Nature of the Unconscious as Evidence of Conflict Thematic analysis leads us to the semantic and substantive definition of the psyche, the "classical" school of thought.
  Indeed, in the first half of the last century, not only the conscious but also the unconscious played a role in the new mapping of the human psyche in psychoanalysis.
  It is not at all accidental to draw special attention to the existence of contradictory poles in the structure of human nature, in particular, in the mental structure.
  In some cases, the thesis that the unconscious assumed leadership in human behavior was based on a discussion of the natural origins of the two world wars.
  By linking the emergence of these political phenomena that shocked the whole world with human aggression, an attempt was made to look for its embryo in the unconscious.
  This created a contemplative bridge between the unconscious and the subject of aggression 518 PHILOSOPHIES, hinting at the causal relationship between them.
  Freud's unexpected statement at the time that the orphaned being in his actions is governed by the unconscious or the pre-conscious upset the conscious "classical" model of the rational being.
  Subsequent medical research has shed light on the proposition that the intelligent being is a person immersed in spiritual contradictions, with "unusual" motives for his behavior, with motives outside the realm of consciousness.
 And we consider it necessary to start the internal substantiation of the existence of the conflict from the structure of the human psyche, in which we can define the struggle going on in the human being between his own desires, aspirations and the obstacles imposed by the social environment.
  How this conflict proceeds and develops is a platform for a possible and impossible dialogue between the unconscious and consciousness.
  Recognizing one's self presupposes realizing that one lives on the level of the unconscious, and this is in a situation when there is a constant struggle not to consciously accept what is not under the control of consciousness.
  Sigmund Freud was the first to speak about the internal motivators of the term under discussion.
  In his theory, in addition to the very controversial and at the time unacceptable provisions for other representatives of the field, the idea of ​​internal contradiction, which is in line with human nature and is always present with it, was declared.
 The process of Freudian self-knowledge becomes even more complicated when the thinker calls for help not only the intellect but also the heart.
  In this reality, which is complex in terms of content, but from the point of view of realization, in the long run, a person, being consistent, will succeed in getting rid of the need to drive away or push away this or that feeling / feeling.
  In fact, the deeper a person penetrates into his reality, the more he becomes alert in his consciousness: the consciousness becomes visible, and the internal contradiction, the conflict, becomes less.
  At the same time, "psychoanalysis cannot consider consciousness as the essence of the structure of the psyche, 519 PHILOSOPHY, but instead must consider it the attribute of the psyche, which will either join or not join the rest of its (ie, mental, author) features" [7, p. 841].
  Being unconscious, the unconscious sums up all the desires, worries and experiences that a person tries to forget by not realizing them.
  Presenting the whole life of the intelligent being under the domination of the psyche, Freud emphasizes the formation of consciousness or the "I" as a model of socialization of the individual (with its various needs) and the confrontation of conflicting desires with it, and as an end in the context of their expulsion. one of the defensive tricks of a person with a mental structure ”[6, p. 358].
 Referring to the elements that nurture human conflict, it is credible to mention the two types of instincts that ensure conflict flourishing in the unconscious: the thirst for life and the instinct for death.
  In the Freudian psycho-philosophical panorama, the destructive, destructive side of man is revealed by the instinct of death.
  It must be admitted that every person has a tendency to show a hostile, malicious attitude.
  Believing that the motive of man is the love of life and destruction, the thinker acts from the position of instinctive theory.
  They fight in the realm of the unconscious and in fact cause a person to be good or evil.
  The more vividly the instincts of death and life are manifested in a person's psyche, the more the person strives for establishment in the external, social environment.
 This is how the internal conflict is manifested in the objective world.
  This internal contradiction in the unconscious forms the "conflict" of human nature from the beginning [4, p.84].
  The thinker, however, does not completely rule out the very small possibility of doing some work in the matter of the supremacy of this or that beginning.
  However, in case of accepting it, another contradiction is formed, that is, the subject of the impossibility of influencing the unconscious and the subject of the regulation of the "principles" 520 PHILOSOPHY within it.
  Probably because of this, the concept of "sublimation" is introduced in psychoanalysis in order to overcome the obstacle of double contradiction, when a person converts his libido, which is most often suppressed, to achieve goals of social significance.
 In terms of meaning, in fact, in professional literature, the possibility of liberation from internal motives of conflict is connected with the term "sublimation".
  By recording the creation of the intelligent being in conflict with the conflict, the mechanism of sublimation is viewed not so much as a signal of overcoming the contradictions of human nature, but as a circumvention of it, with the help of which it becomes possible to avoid destructive, unpredictable manifestations of the unconscious.
  Although it should be noted that sublimation was initially considered a "lifeline" for the most dangerous of conflicts, the management of interpersonal conflict, which was later reliably denied.
 Natural aggression as an internal indicator of conflict Z. Freud is not the only one who connects the instigators of human conflict with physiological causation.
  To think that no more and no less aggression, the polarity of behavior, and, most importantly, that is the natural way of living in this world, were predicted at birth, was once claimed by K. Lawrence, whose work The So-Called Evil: A Natural History of Aggression was published. From that moment on, he enjoyed great public interest.
 Although both Freud and Lorentz defined in their theories an important element in understanding aggression as an intelligent being, in their view there is an essential interpretation. In fact, sublimation is the transformation of undesirable motives and instincts into more socially acceptable forms. see Medical Psychology. Educational Manual. Edited by Gasparyan KhV, page 159.
 521 PHILOSOPHY difference.
  According to Lorentz, a person is more successful in showing practicality when he is aggressive.
  Being aggressive is useful.
  Being aggressive, as well as physiologically human conflict, does not have a negative connotation in the Lorentz sense, in contrast to Freud, who believed that aggression, containing elements of the motivational transmission of harm, serves to stimulate conflict and gradually nourish life.
  In his model, man exists "by destroying himself and being reborn."
  At the same time, aggression is defined as the instinct of involuntary manifestation and "... the danger of that instinct is to be spontaneous" [3, p.26].
  Aggression is not fueled by external factors.
  But it also needs to be manifested from within, and at some point it must overflow.
 The logic of this last observation is quite easy to grasp when referring to Lorentz, Darwin's theory of evolution and the idea of ​​the struggle for natural selection.
 And if we combine this idea with the possible "inheritance" of aggression from the propositions put forward by him [3, p.23], we can assume that aggression has become natural and at the same time man has matured by being aggressive.
 Man has acquired his aggression as a result of natural development, lasting for millennia.
  This quality was given to man not automatically, but in response to the struggle for life.
  This is probably one of the most obvious arguments that Lorenz used in favor of his theory.
  Although the fact that this author often studies animals and reproduces the results on an intelligent being is often drummed up, it is clear that the thinker in his theory not only identified the animal with the human, but very emphatically showed the human development, sometimes showing behavior. similarities between them, especially when analyzing the pre-civilization historical period.
  Due to this, we also think that the thinker did not discuss the biological origins of the manifestation of human aggression, which was regularly mistakenly attributed to him as a result of a misunderstanding of the theory2.
 Thus, the mutual agreement of the human-conflict-aggression trio presupposes the reality of being in a constant state of war.
  This idea can be considered as a hint that aggression should not remain dead. It is necessary to get rid of it.
  Lorentz is generally convinced that "... every modern civilized person suffers from insufficient discharge of instinctive-aggressive motives" [3, p. 117].
  The conflict exists, and it intensifies, because the aggressive-destructive energy of the human being is constantly increasing, and it does not remain forever under the control of man.
 Contrary to the above, this inherent form of conflict, aggression, can also benefit a person.
  Conflict aggression in its manifestation in defense of phenomena and interests important for human beings also has a place [8, p. 35].
  And this means that aggression is not permanent, it is not spontaneous, but it still exists.
 E. Fromm generally emphasized the type of person according to the nature of socialization, and derived the qualitative line of interpersonal conflict from it.
  Depending on whether a person has an optimistic, loving, or consumerist attitude toward life, he or she encourages progressive and destructive conflicts.
 As for Lorentz's observation in this regard, in his view there are no practical exercises aimed at aggression.
  The thinker naively tends to believe that only the accumulation of theoretical knowledge about self-knowledge, in this connection it is appropriate to mention D. Lerman and L. Heisenberg. See Lehrmann Behavior, in.
  Quarterly Review of Biology, Vol. 28, N.4, New York 1953, pp. 337 Washington 1972, pp. 123-128.
 E. Fromm uses the terms "biophilia" and "necrophilia". see Fromm J. Moscow 1994, pp. 280-318.
 523 PHILOSOPHY It seems that having information about the existence of natural aggression is more than enough.
  As far as knowledge is concerned, it should especially refer to the objective study of "causal connections in our behavior", for "... all the phenomena in the world are based on the laws of nature, and in this sense we are all led to the laws of nature" [2, p.56].
 Moving in this direction, Lorentz, in particular, attempts to understand how to make a substitution in order to eliminate the conflict between the object of aggression and the one that has nothing to do with aggression [2, p.176].
  It can be accepted with some reservations that the thinker spoke in this way about sublimation, about which, however, there are no analyzes in his main work.
 We think that Lorentz's theory of aggression, based on the above-mentioned Darwinian view, did not presuppose the discussion of the reasons for its existence.
  And even for that Lorentz did not attach importance to man's imaginative possibilities.
  Contrary to Lorentz, Freud became a "philanthropist." He revealed the innate limitations of human nature.
  Everyone has a problem in their psyche, but keeping a magnifying glass on the problem is also a person's potential.
  Fleeing away from our conflicting nature, we become more immersed in it and, on the contrary, going deeper, are able to recognize it and lead it.
  Conflict should be neither feared nor, moreover, avoided. It is necessary to be able to work with it, entering into a "deal" and finding the most useful solution in this or that situation.
  It is noteworthy that the philosopher, sociologist M. Follett attached importance to learning the skill of working with conflict, emphasizing not its destructive but constructive consequences.
  Emphasizing the path from action to change of thinking, he models the following revolutionary slogan: "Unless you change the pattern of human behavior, you can not change people" [5, p. 75].
 In fact, the conflicts that are based on aggression can, in principle, both develop and decline. 524 PHILOSOPHY.
  Aggression is a natural trait that causes human behavior, which is why it has a place in each of our lives.
  However, being predicted for us, its activation and passivity are subject to a number of externally controlled factors.
  Among them, emotional hunger becomes urgent.
  Having no need to inherit emotion, modern man uses his intellect. We are talking about emotional disqualification when there is pleasure but there is no joy.
 The first of these is transient and presupposes that it is short-lived without suffering.
  In spite of that, joy is often a life that requires long work and effort.
  Moreover, the force to be invested almost always requires living in inconvenience.
 Given the differences between the above-mentioned thinkers on the subject, one important fact is obvious: they are convinced that we have natural aggression, which means that a person can not choose not to be in conflict. He was born that way.
  The distinguishing feature is where and how a person directs aggression, whether to build or dismantle life.
 Conclusion In the end, living between the objective reality and what the inner world demands / forbids, and, accordingly, any conflicting reality, which balance of weight becomes weighty for a person?
  Given that each of us involuntarily finds himself in the reality of a cultural mosaic, it turns out that the struggle between the two can end in favor of the individual if society presents itself as necessary in the context of perseverance in making seemingly pleasurable demands, instead denying the phenomenon of punishment.
 In conclusion, we can say that content conflicts are largely based on the nature of life.
  Thus, we come to the following: 525 PHILOSOPHY  In essence, conflicts, regardless of their direction and nature, serve as a signal for the renewal of life in the context of the possibility of starting or doing everything or a given episode again.
  The more active the conflict within a person, the greater the likelihood that he will find himself in a conflict conflict in the world of orphans.
  And since we all empathize with the conflict inside, it turns out that there will always be conflict in the outside world, and we will be involved in it.
 Բան No intelligent being can escape from internal conflict.
 From a philosophical point of view, the meaning of not avoiding conflict lies in accepting the circumstance of the change that accompanies and presupposes it.
  As for the direction, song and content of that change, one can only hope that the person who is responsible is the one.
 .
