The conservation of Armenia's extremely rich biodiversity is primarily carried out in about 3 dozen protected areas, where about 60-70% of the species flora of the republic is concentrated, including the vast majority of rare, endangered and endemic species [1].
  3 out of 5 state sanctuaries in the Northeast region are located in Lori region: relic pine cone in Gyulagarak (25.86 km2), Margahovit (50 km2) and Mrtavardeni (10 km2) sanctuaries.
 Different plant geographical regions of Armenia are distinguished by their typical dendro diversity, endemic or relict species.
  If in the south-eastern floristic regions of the republic (Vayots Dzor, Syunik) there are a large number of endemic tree species (Pyrus, Sorbus, Crataegus and many representatives of other genera), then the north-east is especially distinguished by the variety of relics.
  From this point of view, alpine dendrocenoses have almost no economic significance, but their ecological significance is invaluable.
  In fact, the alpine dendrocenoses are a unique barrier to forest communities in the lower reaches and are distinguished by their ecological significance as forests of high environmental value.
  High-value environmental forests (NSAs) are generally classified as forests that are necessary for human existence, as well as for the conservation of the planet's biosphere.
  The key role of the NSA is associated with their high environmental, socio-economic, as well as biodiversity conservation values ​​[2].
 The alpine forest zone has been formed in such forest conditions, where the role of wind and heat factors is especially great.
  Under such conditions, the growth intensity of the species is very weak, and the trees survive mainly by vegetative propagation [3], characterized by extremely low, only V-Va quality, often acquiring a shrubby appearance.
  They are mostly small and are located against the background of abundant, high grass.
  After felling, the grass cover quickly takes the place of the trees, showing intensive growth and hindering the restoration of the tree species.
  As a result, the upper forest border has dropped significantly, sometimes up to 500 m.
  That is, both the upper forest border and the alpine vegetation are of secondary origin.
 In general, these forest communities, being against the background of abundant grassland, have always been destroyed under the influence of intensive grazing, and have suffered severely from uncoordinated deforestation.
  Against the background of lowering the upper border of the forest, in some places there are areas where forest communities are rising.
  In the conditions of the current climate change, it is predicted that not only the shifting of certain plant species will take place, but also the movement of the upper border of the forest upwards.
  In fact, the forest does not conquer new territories, but partially restores its former borders.
 The alpine zone of this region is characterized by unfavorable dendroclimatic conditions for the growth of tree species, where the latter are distinguished by extremely low dendrometric indicators [5].
  That is why the dendroflora of the alpine zone of the studied region stands out with a relatively poor composition - 52 species belonging to 20 families and 32 genera (only 14% of the taxonomic diversity of the republic's trees).
  20 of them are low-growing and curved tree species (Betula litwinowii, Acer trautvetteri, Sorbus aucuparia, Salix caprea), 31 - shrubs, the most common of which is a relic of the Tertiary, Rhododendron caucasicum.
  Some of the 341 species found in these dendrocenoses are relics and are listed as rare species in the Red Book of Plants of Armenia.
 The issue of preservation and restoration of landscape forest cenoses is of special importance for our republic at present.
  The high slopes of the mountains in Armenia, which make up more than 30% of the territory of the republic, are barren, very rocky, and the soil layer is constantly eroding due to ongoing erosion processes.
  Erosion processes are most visible in areas where massive deforestation took place during the energy crisis of the 1990s.
 It should be noted that there are certain literary data on the negative consequences of deforestation in the area studied by us in the XX century. From the 1930s, [7] and richer from the 1960s.
  Studying the condition of the upper forest border in the eastern part of the Lesser Caucasus, A. Գ. Dolukhanov [9] mentions the danger of erosion processes as a factor of artificial lowering of the upper forest border.
 Back in the 1950s in northern Armenia A. Abrahamyan, studying the upper border of the forest, came to the conclusion that the lowering of the upper border of the forest is not due to natural factors, but first of all to human economic activity, the consequences of which - erosion and landslide areas - lead to climate change, microclimate and xerophilization of vegetation [8].
  The lowering of the upper forest boundary is thus explained even now [10,11].
 Based on the study of historical maps, foresters conclude that the area occupied by forests has been reduced almost twice in the last 250 years [11, 12].
  The lowering of the upper forest boundary has brought with it many environmental problems: degradation of the area, change of ecosystems and loss of biodiversity due to it.
 Eventually, the forested areas are subject to water erosion, as a result of which the top layer of soil is washed and exposed.
  Degraded areas are formed in the form of rocks, which are later covered with lichens and various groups of petrophilous vegetation.
 The main ways of preservation and restoration of the upper forest zone are the implementation of measures to support the natural regeneration of the forest and the creation of forest cultures.
 342 The natural restoration of the upper forest border was mentioned by K.D. Mamisashvili [13] for the Lagodekhi reserve, and L. B. Makhatadze and H.M. Hakhinyan [14] for the eastern part of the Greater Caucasus and Armenia.
 Numerous studies have been devoted to successive changes in the forest habitats of the upper mountainous region of northeastern Armenia [8,10,15], which unequivocally state that the herds suffer greatly from grazing livestock, as a result of which these areas are rapidly occupied by high density of aspen and hornbeam. .
  Studies of forest habitat cuttings in the upper forest belt have shown that in the vast areas beech is completely replaced by hornbeam and aspen, and oak at best by trunk oak or seed and trunk hornbeam [6].
 Studying the processes of video change taking place in the part of Odzun region (Lori region), H. A. Ghulijanyan [16] notes that at altitudes of 1400–1600 m, beech buds make up 40%, hornbeam - 39%, and higher - beech hornbeam - 25%, Caucasian hornbeam and other species - 40 and 35%, respectively.
 In order to accurately assess the transformation processes in subalpine dendrocenoses, we have conducted a study of sperm regeneration in relict bushes and maples.
  Relict dendrocenoses were observed: mixed tree with predominance of maple, mixed tree with predominance of birch, pure birch and deciduous birch.
  The results of the study are presented in the tables below.
 As can be seen, the rate of sperm regeneration is slow.
  The reasons are different: frostbite, anthropogenic pressure, severe climatic and ecological conditions.
 Table 1 shows that the seedling growth of maple is about 2.3 times higher than the seedling growth of beech.
  The reason is that beech seeds are eaten more by animals.
  Oak seeds are also eaten by animals, and 1-2 year old sprouts do not give further growth, they die, not enduring the harsh conditions of the upper mountain zone.
  The maple tree continues to maintain its dominant role in the tree.
  In general, sperm regeneration is slow but progressive.
 343 Table 1 Seed Restoration in Mixed Tree-dominated Mixed Tree (Gugark Forestry) Forestry (p (field 3) (2015) Juvenile age and quantity per 1 ha 5 and 1 year 2 years 3 years old Type / c Highland Hacharni Oak Large Top Other Total Total Table 2 Seed Reproduction in Mixed Tree with Dominance of Birch (Margahovit Forestry, Forestry, 2100 m) (Experiment 4) (2015) Age and Quantity Common Tsernov Archin T and more 1 year 2 years 3 years of Capricorn Total Table 2 shows that as a result of seed regeneration in the tree the picture is as follows: 3 birch, 1 maple, 5 arose + 1 goat.
  The beech was pushed out of the tree for the same reason that was observed in the previous experimental sites.
 Arose seed germination is almost 4.7 times higher than that of goat and 1.85 times that of birch individuals.
  The climatic conditions for Aroseni's growth were favorable.
  In this case, too, the sperm recovery is noticeable, but slow.
 Table 3 Seed Restoration Restoration in clean birch (Margahovit (Margahovit forestry, forestry, 2300 m) (2016) Age and quantity Tribe Birch Litvinov Goat Total Total 68 8 years and over 1 year 2 years 3 years 3 years It can be seen from the birch that it gives seed growth.
 Although the number of goat individuals is increasing, but in general there are no seed individuals of other tree species, and the birch remains predominant.
 Table 4 Tarragon forestry, Container grass birch, birch, Margahovit forestry, 2450 m, 2017 201 7. Type 1-3 years 4-5 years 6-10 years From 10 years old Total birch Litvinov Arosen Ordinary Maple Alpine Total Table 4 The analysis of Table 4 allows us to conclude that birch stands out from the birch by its growth, suppressing the alder and alpine maple.
  The composition of the tree is as follows: 8 birches, 1 arose + 1 highland maple.
  One can assume that the tree can be transformed into pure birch.
 Based on the data obtained from the experimental sites (mixed tree with predominance of maple, mixed tree with predominance of birch and pure birch and deciduous birch) it can be concluded that at 2000-2300 m above sea level, near the upper border of the forest, the humidity is high and good. conditions are created especially for the germination of seeds of mesophilic species.
 From the study of experimental sites we come to the conclusion that in the upper zone of the forest there is a seed growth of tree species.
  In our opinion, the latter can satisfy the shift of a mature tree.
 In general, the results of our study on dendrocenoses in the Margahovit sub-alpine zone of northern Armenia show that over the last century, relict birch trees with almost alligator (Sorbus aucuparia) and alpine maple (Acer traveti) predominate almost unchanged.
  In all cases, the seedling growth of birch is superior to that of other tree species.
  A certain proportion of the species mentioned in the composition of trees is preserved in almost all forest areas of the sub-alpine zone of the region.
  There has been no significant change in the distribution dynamics of Caucasian myrtle and a number of other species representing the alpine dendrocenoses.
  However, the natural restoration of these tree species does not provide sufficient results for the preservation and reproduction of dendrocenoses in the subalpine zone.
 In any case, natural restoration in the upper part of the forest is not enough.
  One of the main reasons is the 346 far-sighted activities of man, but in the conditions of the current climate change there is a unique opportunity to restore the forest in the highlands.
  Therefore, in these conditions of deforestation, it is advisable to carry out reforestation with naturally occurring species (Quercus macranthera oak, Acer trautvetteri, Salix caprea), Betula litwinowii and Sorbus (especially Sorbus .
  Considering that monodominant plantings are not stable and durable, preference should be given to mixed plantings.
  In this case, it is expedient and effective to ensure the emergence and development of oak-birch, oak-maple, oak-arose species combinations.
 In the tree-cut and non-restored parts of the upper forest zone, where erosion processes are present, it is expedient to use some frost-resistant shrubs (biberstein and eastern currant, gerimast, Caucasian honeysuckle, etc.) in the planting schemes.
  Mixing of types can be done in rows, groups, chess pieces and ribbons.
  On small (up to 15 0) slopes it can be planted with holes, and in rocky places with high slope with trenches, which will contribute to the relatively high stickiness and preservation of plants.
 The development of the nursery economy is extremely important for the preservation and restoration of dendrocenoses in the upper part of the forest.
 The expansion and improvement of the nursery network will also contribute to the creation of a seed bank of valuable tree species for our region and the preservation of their genetic fund.
 There are nurseries in the Gugark branch of "Hayantar" (still in 1950-1960), which, in parallel with the creation of forest cultures, also deal with the problems of growing planting material.
  At present in the Gugark region there are several nurseries "Khandak", "Taron", "Sznut", "Tezh Ler" and others.
  In the 1990s, the activity of those nurseries was almost interrupted, and then in 1997-1998. has been restored.
  1997 "Kirushna places" were established in the territory of Margahovit forest state and in 2001 "Tupli Bugor" nurseries.
  Measures to improve nursery operations continue to this day.
 In order to preserve the upper part of the forest, it is necessary to develop scientifically based afforestation schemes.
  It is also necessary to carry out the care of the young in time.
 347 The allocation of specially protected new areas is important for the protection of the upper forest zone.
  According to H. K. According to Maghakyan [17], in northern Armenia, roses do not reach the upper border of the forest, they are isolated from the upper part of the forest by a meadow association.
  However, according to our research, at present the myrtle bushes near the villages of Margahovit and Fioletovo not only reach the upper border of the forest, but also penetrate the forest zone in some places, causing shrub sinuses in various trees.
 From the conducted studies it can be concluded: • Monodominant plantings are not stable and durable, preference should be given to mixed plantings.
  In this case, it is expedient and effective to ensure the emergence and development of oak-birch, oak-maple, oak-oak, pine species.
 • Natural restoration in the upper part of the forest is not enough.
  In the current climate change there is a unique opportunity to restore the forest in the upper zone.
  Therefore, in these conditions of deforestation, it is expedient to carry out reforestation with naturally occurring species (Quercus macranthera oak, Acer trautvetteri, Salix caprea), birch Litvinov (Betula litwinowii), and restored to the usual species (Sorbus aucuparia).
 • Separate the forest areas as grasslands and prohibit the grazing of livestock on the entire upper border, with a vertical zoning of about 200-300 m, without damaging the forested areas.
 .
