The relations between the Republic of Armenia and the European Union have a history of more than two decades.
  These relations are important both economically and politically, as the worldviews of modern Armenia are more pro-Western, which is due to a number of factors.
  First, it should be noted that in the early 1990s, the country was dominated by ideological currents aimed at gaining independence, which were automatically anti-Soviet.
  Second, Independent Armenia, conditioned by the earthquake, the Artsakh war and the economic blockade, needed financial resources, the main donor of which was the West.
  Third, the collapsed Soviet Union did not have advanced legal and economic legislation, and examples of its formation were also taken from the West.
 The relations between Armenia and the EU started in 1996. By the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement signed between the Republic of Armenia and the European Member States.
  The development of the relations between Armenia and the EU is conditionally divided into 3 stages: 1. 1996-2006.
  1996 It was signed on April 22, 1999 between the Republic of Armenia and the European Communities and their Member States. The Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) entered into force on 1 July 2006. [1]
  It was signed for a period of 10 years, and after the expiration of the term it was automatically extended for one year each time.
 2. At the beginning of the 21st century, cooperation between Armenia and the EU was also regulated by the Armenia-EU European Neighborhood Policy (ENP) Action Plan (ENP Action Plan), which was formally approved in 2006. He was born on November 14 in Brussels.
  The ENP Action Plan identified a number of priority areas for cooperation, including the rule of law, the strengthening of democratic institutions, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, and the improvement of the investment climate.
 Under the European Neighborhood Policy, the EU worked with its southern and eastern neighbors to achieve the highest possible degree of political association and economic integration.
 3. The next and ongoing Phase 3 was based on the Eastern Partnership (hereinafter referred to as the Foreign Ministry) program, which was an initiative of the European Union targeting six countries in Eastern Europe and the South Caucasus: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine.
  The official one of the 4 ECONOMICS of the project was given in 2009. [7] At a summit of 27 EU member states and 6 partner countries in Prague on 7 May.
 The aim of this initiative was to strengthen relations between foreign countries and EU member states through deepening political cooperation and economic integration.
 This strategy of the Eastern Partnership Territorial Cooperation Programs sets out the priorities for the EU-funded Territorial Development Programs to be implemented between the above six countries and the EU, the requirements for the regions to be covered, the target groups, the financial framework and the governing bodies.
 Within the framework of this cooperation, in 2010 Negotiations on the Armenia-EU Association Agreement started in July 2012, and in 2012. Negotiations on the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area, part of the Association Agreement, in June
  However, in 2013 In July, Armenia and the European Union concluded negotiations on an Association Agreement.
  After Armenia's decision to join the Customs Union, the EU announced that it would not be possible to initial the Association Agreement.
  The European Union and Armenia have stated that they have concluded negotiations on an Association Agreement, including a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area, but will not sign it as Armenia has new international commitments.
  However, we consider it necessary to mention that in 2013 A joint statement between the Republic of Armenia and the European Union was adopted within the framework of the Eastern Partnership Summit in Vilnius on November 29, 2006, reaffirming the mutual commitment to continue developing and strengthening comprehensive cooperation in all areas of mutual interest.
  Based on common values, Armenia and the European Union are committed to developing cooperation in areas such as the continuous improvement of democratic institutions and the judiciary, the strengthening of human rights and the rule of law, the fight against corruption, and more.
 As a result, in 2017 The Armenia-EU Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the Agreement) was signed in Brussels on November 24, 2006. [4]
  Of course, this agreement can not be equated with the Association Agreement in terms of the full potential of the EU economic opportunities and the enjoyment of free trade zone privileges.
  Therefore, the positions of the Republic of Armenia in this respect are inferior to Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine, which signed the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement.
  Procurement issues are discussed in detail within the framework of the Comprehensive and Extended Partnership Agreement.
  In particular, Article 16 defines the obligation of the parties to cooperate in the fight against organized crime and corruption, including in domestic activities such as public procurement fraud.
 An entire chapter (Chapter 8) in the agreement is devoted to the public procurement system.
  Thus, Article 269 stipulates that the relationship between the World Trade Organization (WTO) Public Procurement Agreement and the Parties confirms their mutual rights and obligations under the Revised Public Procurement Agreement 2012.
  Parties Article XIX of the WTO Public Procurement Agreement, entitled "Information and Oversight of the Parties' Obligations", stipulates that each Party shall promptly promulgate any public procurement law, regulation, judgment, general application the decision and any procedure (including standard contractual provisions) shall be applied mutatis mutandis upon direct notification to the other Party [6].
  In more detail, the Procurement Provisions in Article 271 of the Parties set out additional rules whereby each Party undertakes to ensure that all procurement notices are available free of charge and directly on the Internet, with one common access to the Internet.
  In addition, the announcements may be published on the appropriate paper media.
  Any such media should be widely available, and such announcements should be readily available to the public, at least before the deadline stated in the announcement.
  This provision and 2016 There is some inconsistency between the RA Law on Procurement, adopted in December 2007, in that Article 8 of the law stipulates that within the framework of the functions defined by the law, communication can be carried out electronically, the announcement and the invitation can be provided electronically [1].
  That is, the RA law does not stipulate the obligation to announce purchases by electronic means.
 As for the requirement that the announcement provided for in the agreement be free of charge, the RA Law on Procurement stipulates that the Government of the Republic of Armenia may establish a fee for participation in electronic procurement [1].
  It is important to note that this clause is often confused with non-professional circles with 5% of the bid price or after that 10% of the contract price.
 The requirements for the Assessment Procedures of the Agreement also include safeguards relating to interim measures aimed at eliminating the alleged breach or preventing further damage to the interests of one of the parties, eliminating illegal decisions, planned procurement, discriminatory approaches, and compensation for breaches.
 The conditions proposed to the Public Procurement Evaluation Body by the agreement are remarkable, which, in fact, shows the necessity of establishing a qualitatively new Evaluation Body in the Republic of Armenia.
  In particular, when evaluating the decision to award a contract, each party ensures that the customer will not be able to conclude the contract until the appraisal body (the procuring entity under the Procurement Law of the Republic of Armenia) has made a decision on the application of interim measures or evaluation [ 1].
 It is also worth mentioning another discrepancy between the agreement and the RA Law on Procurement.
  Thus, the agreement stipulates that the chairman of the evaluation body must have the same legal and professional qualifications as the members of the judiciary, ie at least one of the members must be a lawyer with higher legal education, while the law of the Republic of Armenia provides for either economics (economics). ) and management or the availability of higher education in law, which allows only economists to be on the board.
  By the way, in the law of March 23, 2018. According to the amendments, the number of persons investigating procurement complaints is determined by a government decision [1].
 There are also differences in terms of inactivity.
  As it is known, the period of inactivity is the period between the day following the day of the announcement of the decision on concluding the contract and the day of the occurrence of the right of the customer to sign the contract.
  This period is intended for the participants to be able to appeal the decision to conclude a contract to the procuring entity.
  The contract concluded before the expiration of the period of inactivity or without concluding a contract is null and void.
 Thus, it is obvious that the fulfillment of the legal obligations regarding the procurement of this Agreement is a step ensuring progress for the RA Procurement System, but, as we have already mentioned in our previous works, a number of clauses of the EEU Agreement pose serious challenges in the current procurement legislation.
 .
