In Armenia, as in all democracies, the judiciary is distinguished by its independence and sovereignty.
  According to the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, the judiciary is enshrined as a separate branch of public administration [1].
  And the activity of a judge is also fixed by a number of legal norms.
  Because without fixing these legal norms, judges cannot fulfill their duties.
 JURISDICTION As we know, only courts can administer justice in the Republic of Armenia, and judges are the state officials authorized to restore justice [2].
 Judges are faced with various problems in the judicial system of the Republic of Armenia.
  The state, in its turn, undertakes to ensure the immunity of judges, because without ensuring the immunity of judges, we can not demand a fair trial.
 Armenia, still after independence, is fighting to create a dignified judicial system.
 The foundation of the new stage of independence of the judiciary was laid in 1995, when the Constitution was adopted.
 The stage of creating an independent judicial and legal system was formed in 1996.
  The precondition for this new judicial system was the formation of the Council of Justice, which was the self-governing body of the judiciary and made decisions on the appointment, promotion and other issues of the judiciary.
  The Council of Justice presented to the President of the Republic of Armenia the circle of persons who can be appointed to the position of a judge.
 The reforms of the judiciary continue to this day.
  The principles of the current judiciary are enshrined in the Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia [2], which clearly presents the principles of the judiciary, the structure of the judiciary, the scope of activities of individual courts, ways to resolve issues related to the judiciary, the activity of judges in each court, their status, activity Guarantees, rules of conduct.
 Thus, the Judicial Code [2] enshrines, for example, the depoliticization of judges.
  This provision contains the fact that a judge may not be a member of any party or engage in political propaganda of the party.
  He can only participate in the elections of the local self-government or the National Assembly only as a voter.
 Establishing guarantees to ensure the independent activity of a judge is considered an important issue for the modern state.
  It is defined by the state through the Judicial Code.
  The immunity of a judge is also enshrined in law by the state [4, Chapter 11, Article 51].
  A judge's immunity is that in some cases a judge may not be deprived of a number of rights, such as liberty, without the decision of the Supreme Judicial Council, except when the judge was arrested at or after the commission of a crime.
 It should also be ruled out that criminal proceedings may not be instituted against a judge without a decision of the High Judicial Council, and that a judge may not be questioned as a witness in the exercise of his or her powers or in cases where he or she has conducted a trial within his or her jurisdiction. [4, Chapter 11, Article 51, paragraph 8].
  This provision is one of the new points added during the reforms of the judiciary.
 Along with the immunity of a judge, his / her immutability must also be considered, which is clearly strengthened by the relevant legal norms in the Republic of Armenia.
  The immutability of a judge is expressed by his term of office and a number of other circumstances.
  The term of office of a judge is considered to be up to 65 years.
  Of course, in case of reduction of judges of the relevant specialization in the Court, the preference to continue their tenure in the given court is given to the senior judges of the relevant specialization.
  If the powers of a judge are terminated, or the number of judges of that court is increased, the relevant reserve judge in that court continues to serve as a judge, and, of course, is no longer considered a reserve judge.
 JURISDICTION Only by the decision of the Supreme Judicial Council, when the court of first instance cannot ensure its normal activity due to the number of judges, then by the decision of the Supreme Judicial Council another judge of the same specialization may be sent to the court of general jurisdiction for up to one year.
 In addition to these two important principles of a judge's immunity and immutability, which determine his or her fair conduct, a judge's salary and social security must also be distinguished, as without a judge's social security guarantee, the judge's risk of corruption increases.
 Of course, in the process of creating a new judicial system after the collapse of the USSR, this circumstance was fixed by a clear legal norm, because without fixing it by a legal norm, there will be chaos in the judicial system, as a judge is always considered at risk of corruption.
 The state sets itself the task of reducing those risks as much as possible.
 The Constitution also refers to a judge's social security, which, in accordance with Article 164 մաս 10, defines remuneration commensurate with his or her high status and responsibility. [1]
  A judge has the right to receive a pension in case of reaching the retirement age, ie in case of reaching the age of 65, and also in other cases defined by law.
  A judge's pension may not be terminated if he or she performs other work, but this does not apply when a judge enters public service.
  By ensuring the social guarantee of a judge, the state receives the right to state insurance against health and accidents at the expense of state funds in accordance with the conditions and amount defined by the Government of the Republic of Armenia.
 The judge also enjoys other social guarantees for the public servant, which can be used exclusively by public law [8].
  A judge's salary and the allowances set by the judge, as well as the amount of the pension cannot be reduced.
  This is possible only if it is done adequately for all officials.
 The factor of his leave should also be singled out among the social guarantees of a judge, as it is extremely important for ensuring the activity of a judge.
  It is enshrined in Article 58 of the Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia [4, Article 58].
 Judicial leave is annual and paid for a period of 30 working days.
 In order to defend a scientific dissertation, a judge has the right to have unpaid leave of up to 30 days.
  In addition, the 30-day period is defined in such a way as not to disrupt the normal operation of the court, and that period is given to the judge in parts, but not in more than three parts.
  The President of the Court approves the annual leave schedule of the judge by January 31 of each year, which is subject to publication and is published on the official website of the judiciary.
  Of course, there are cases when leave is granted during a period that does not correspond to the approved schedule, and the reasons for granting that leave must be reported to the Disciplinary Committee, which is informed by the president of the court.
 Only the Supreme Judicial Council can determine the granting of leave to a judge.
  The Supreme Judicial Council also resolves disputes related to a judge's leave.
 Only with the consent of the Supreme Judicial Council can the amount of a judge's leave be extended due to family or personal circumstances, which is considered unpaid leave.
 The right to participate in educational programs is considered a part of a judge's activity, which is again enshrined in a legal norm [4, Chapter 1, Article 4].
 The use of educational programs enables a judge to ensure his / her professional growth and to bring his / her professional ability to a new level. 56 JURISDICTIONS.
  The judge should be allowed to participate in educational programs, conferences and other professional gatherings of lawyers only if the absence of a judge does not disrupt the normal functioning of the court.
  When the judge has obtained the consent of the president of the court or the educational commission to participate in any educational event, his / her absence is considered honorable and the judge's salary is preserved.
  The president of the court agrees to be absent for up to five working days, only in case the judge participates in educational programs, commissions and other legal professional meetings.
  When the judge does not have enough of that five-day period, he can apply to the educational commission with a request to provide more days.
 The actual activity of a judge is ensured not only by the mentioned principles but also by the rules of conduct established towards the judge.
  The rules of this conduct are intended to ensure the normal functioning of the judge and to ensure the impartiality and independence of the court, which will facilitate an impartial trial.
  The rules of ethics and conduct of a judge ensure the high authority of the judge and the judiciary.
  The rules of conduct of judges and the rules of ethics have been legally enshrined in the Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia [4, Articles 66, 68].
 It is noteworthy that the rules of conduct of a judge are also mandatory for the members of the Supreme Judicial Council elected by the National Assembly.
  The judge is obliged to observe the rules of proper conduct defined by this Code [7].
  Failure to comply with the rules of conduct shall result in disciplinary action against the judge.
 And the violation of the rules of ethics by the judge cannot lead to the disciplinary responsibility of the judge.
  The rules of conduct of a judge have been legally enshrined in this Code [4, Article 68, paragraph 3].
  There are fourteen of them in this Code.
 JURISDICTION A judge cannot conduct a fair trial without ensuring the guaranteed and fair operation of a judge, in compliance with the above principles underlying his or her activities.
 Taking into account the workload of the RA judicial system, the fair activity of a judge becomes more dependent on the state.
  The state, acting as a guarantor of the fair activity of a judge, should not hinder his activity and put his personal immunity above his own political interests.
  Despite the fact that the state provides all the necessary conditions for a judge to conduct a fair trial, there are cases when judges make mistakes in their work.
  The result of these omissions is that a number of cases with their complaints appear in international instances.
 These cases are mainly resolved to the detriment of our state, and in fact, the state compensates, in many cases maintaining unnecessary conditions for the trial.
 Armenia has launched a program of strategic changes in the judiciary since independence, which continues to this day.
 In our opinion, another provision should be included in those changes, which refers to the cases discussed by the RA in international courts.
  The case passed in all instances in the Republic of Armenia appears in the International Court of Justice, and when our state is a party to the compensation, we suggest that those cases be re-examined in our country, but under the examination of other judges.
  The examination of these cases will allow revealing the shortcomings of the RA judicial system and judges, which have a direct impact on the fact that our country is a democratic state.
  And those shortcomings are always observed in the three-level judicial system of the Republic of Armenia.
 Thus, the independent activity of a judge depends on the state, as the state provides the necessary conditions for a judge to conduct a fair trial, and the judge ensures a fair trial and the restoration of justice.
  The state must always keep the judiciary independent and free from other branches of government.
  After independence, the Republic of Armenia has started a new period, where the reforms of the judiciary are carried out with clearly developed programs.
  It also includes constitutional reforms.
  But, of course, there are also a number of omissions that still need additional analysis.
 In our opinion, additional analyzes should be made to assess the efficiency of the three-level judicial system of the Republic of Armenia.
  It is necessary to make an analysis in the courts of appeal, to understand how effective the examination of the case in a collegial manner is, that is, what changes the examination of the case in a collegial composition in the court of appeal makes.
 .
