Ensuring economic growth is a characteristic of the efficiency of each country's economic system.
  Depending on the rate of economic growth, decisions are made that affect both the current situation and the expectations of economic entities in the future.
 Ways to ensure economic growth are different in different economies.
  However, there is one general formulation - ensuring economic growth through internal and external factors.
 Both groups of factors are important, but depending on the weight of the country in the international arena, what problems the government puts in front of the economic system, what is the typical geopolitical situation, 304 ECONOMICS one of these factors is important in different stages of economic policy implementation. or the other, as well as, possibly, their combination [4, p. 76].
 The complexity and versatility of economic growth, the fact that it is the most important characteristic of the economic life of each country, the peculiarities of the impact of the dynamically changing economic environment on economic growth, as well as methodological difficulties in identifying economic growth factors condition the constant attention of scientists-economists.
 Economic growth in Armenia has unique features and requires special study.
  These include the disproportionate territorial development of the country, the lack of long-term investment, the growing rate of emigration and the need to restore it after a significant decline in GDP.
 One of the main obstacles to the symmetry of the territorial economic development of the Republic of Armenia is the continuous concentration of economic activity around Yerevan and a small number of regions, which is reflected in the growth of the economic role of the capital.
  As a result, the leveling of territorial development between the city of Yerevan and the regions, as well as the regions, occupies an important place among the problems facing the economy and requiring urgent solution.
 Further deepening of territorial development disparities hinders the country's internal social and economic stability and even security, contributing to the unwanted outflow of population from economically underdeveloped areas.
  Therefore, overcoming the disparities of territorial development and balanced territorial development is considered as a priority of the territorial development of the country both in the medium and long term.
 The choice of the research topic is conditioned by the necessary 305 ECONOMICS necessary for the systematic study of the interrelationship between economic growth and the socio-economic situation of the country, with the aim of identifying the factors that have the most significant impact on economic growth and their variation across territories.
 At present, in almost all countries of the world, the main indicator of the level of economic activity is the gross domestic product (GDP) per capita, which more accurately describes the socio-economic development of both the country and its territorial formations.
  As gross domestic product is not calculated in our country on a territorial basis (except for the pilot estimates of the RA NSS for 2015-2016), the indicators of the gross domestic product per capita can be considered as indicators of industry, agriculture, construction and services of the RA regions and Yerevan. the sum per capita.
 In order to develop effective territorial development programs of the Republic of Armenia, it is important to group the regions (including the city of Yerevan) according to the per capita territorial GDP.
  But since the roots of this indicator are closely correlated with the state of economic development of the regions and the existing problems in the economic life, the multidimensional grouping of the RA regions according to the level of economic development is an important issue.
  In this connection, a cluster analysis was performed, which gave an opportunity to group the RA regions according to a number of features.
 Taking into account that many statistical indicators of socio-economic development are missing in territorial terms, therefore for multidimensional analysis only the factors on which there is baseline information have been considered.
  Accordingly, the following factors were singled out, the data on which are presented in Table 1 of Annex 1: Y - GDP per capita, thous. AMD, X 1 - the volume of industrial production per capita, thous. AMD, 306 ECONOMICS X 2 - the volume of gross agricultural output per capita, ths. AMD, X 3 - the volume of gross construction output per capita, thous. AMD, X 4 - the volume of retail trade per capita, thous. AMD, X 5 - poverty rate,%, X 6 - share of urban population in the total population,%, X 7 - employment rate,%, X 8 - unemployment rate,%, X 9 - share of economically active population (renamed labor force according to the new standard) in the total population,%, X 10 - share of men in the total number of labor resources,%, X 11 - average monthly nominal salary (thousand AMD), X 12: consumer spending per capita (average monthly, AMD), X 13 - the volume of imports per capita, thous. AMD 14 X - the volume of exports per capita, thous. AMD. X 14: export volume per capita, thousand AMD. X 14: export volume per capita, thousand AMD.
 For the multidimensional grouping of these indicators, only the most significant factors influencing the regional GDP per capita were selected, which were revealed as a result of a previous correlation analysis: Y, X 1 - r 0.79 (see Table 2 in Annex 1).
 The clustering of the RA regions was carried out by hierarchical and K-average methods [1, p. 102].
  The hierarchical clustering made it possible to estimate the composition and number of clusters covering different regions, which was then used as an input indicator of the clustering method by the K-means method.
 307 ECONOMICS The k-averaging method of clustering was used to extract and analyze cluster characteristics.
  Moreover, 3 was defined as the optimal number of clusters.
 The tables below show the results of the clustering of the regions of the Republic of Armenia using the IBM SPSS program [5, p. 101] using the k-means method.
 Table 1 Average values ​​of variables by clusters (final centers of clusters) Clusters Variables Ranking by clusters The composition of clusters by regions of the Republic of Armenia is presented in Table 2. Table 2 Cluster composition by RA regions Cluster number Cluster composition (RA regions) First c. Yerevan, Syunik Aragatsotn, Shirak, Vayots Dzor Ararat, Armavir, Gegharkunik, Lori, Kotayk, Tavush, Second Third Average GDP per capita (thousand drams) 1011.72 ECONOMICS The first clusters include the city of Yerevan, Syunik where all the observed indicators, including the territorial GDP per capita, are the maximum in 3 clusters - 2346.35 thousand. AMD.
 The second cluster includes 3 regions: Aragatsotn, Shirak, Vayots Dzor, which is characterized by an average level of regional GDP per capita and import volume, but the remaining indicators are the lowest compared to other clusters.
 The third cluster includes Ararat, Armavir, Gegharkunik, Lori, Kotayk and Tavush marzes.
  The opposite picture is observed in this cluster: the per capita GDP and the volume of imports are the lowest compared to the other clusters, but the other indicators are in the middle position.
 The method of regression analysis was used to quantify the impact of various factors on regional GDP, which ultimately enabled the construction of a multifactorial model, determining both the individual and their total impact on the model.
 The initial stage of regression analysis is the selection of factors, which is first of all determined on the basis of qualitative, theoretical analysis of the correlation between the output feature and other indicators, while using statistical and mathematical criteria.
  As a result, the per capita GDP ratio (Y) was taken, the territorial stratification of which is mainly explained by the stratification of the main indicators of socio-economic development of the regions.
  Therefore, a number of indicators conditioning the socio-economic development of the regions have been singled out as factor features.
 When starting the multistage regression analysis, it was first taken into account that the application of multidimensional statistical methods in socio-economic research requires a homogeneity of the statistical combination under study, which was studied with the coefficient of variation (see Annex 1, Table 309 ECONOMICS 1).
  As a result, it was found that the combination is heterogeneous for the output feature and almost all factors.
 Therefore, taking into account the polarization of territorial development between the capital and the regions, the city of Yerevan was excluded from the study.
  As a result, the coefficients of variation decreased significantly, but the heterogeneity for the factors X 1, X 3, X 6, X 8, X 13 and X 14 did not disappear (the coefficients of variation were 90.8%, 36.9%, 35.7%, 42.1%, 57.9%, respectively. , 125.2%).
  Therefore, these factors were excluded from the study, which also made it possible to exclude the phenomenon of multicellularity, which, as can be seen from the matrix of pair correlation coefficients presented in Table 1 of Annex 1, is X 1 and X 11, X 1 and X 14. , X 3 and X 10, X 4 and X 8, X 7 and X 13, X 9 and X 13, X 11 and X 14, X 13 and X 14 (pair correlation coefficients in absolute value exceed 0.7) .
  The inclusion of these factors in the model could lead to the instability of the corresponding regression coefficients of the collegiate variables.
 The model then takes into account the other factors whose pair correlation coefficient with the output attribute is the maximum.
  Moreover, the conformity of the model was checked by means of p-value in each step. If the p-value was less than the chosen significance level α, then the null hypothesis of a mismatch in the existence of the bonds in the regression equation is rejected and the factor is included in the regression model.
  This process continued until the value of p was greater than the significance level α when the factor was included in the model, which means that the model is no longer adequate and it is not appropriate to include the factor in the model [8, p. 960].
 Thus, taking into account the above principles, a step-by-step regression analysis using IBM SPSS provided a model for regional stratification of GDP, which includes factors X 5 and X 11. 310 ECONOMICS The results of the obtained regression equation can be interpreted as follows: The reduction of the poverty level by 1 percentage point in the regions of Armenia will lead to an increase of regional GDP by 22,300 drams per capita, and the increase of the average monthly nominal salary by 1000 drams will lead to an increase of regional GDP per capita by 10,000 drams.
  The multiple determination factor indicates that the variation in regional GDP per capita by 74% is due to the influence of factors included in the model.
 Using the obtained model, the so-called "conditional" short-term forecast was made, distinguishing 3 conditional scenarios.  optimistic scenario. It is assumed that the poverty level in the regions of Armenia will decrease by 1% per year, and the average monthly nominal salary will increase by 10% per year, կամ zero or neutral scenario. It is assumed that there will be no change in the indicators reflected in the model in the regions of the Republic of Armenia.  Pessimistic scenario. It is assumed that the poverty level in the regions of Armenia will increase by 1% per year, and there will be no increase in the average monthly nominal salary.
 According to the above-mentioned conventional scenarios, the forecast made until 2021 is presented in Annex 2, the data of which show that in case of optimistic developments in other equal conditions in 2021 compared to 2018 in Aragatsotn and Vayots Dzor marzes GDP per capita will increase significantly, 1.7 and 1.9 times, respectively.
  In Armavir and Shirak marzes a mild growth of 3-5% is forecasted.
  In other regions, per capita GDP will grow by an average of 40%.
 In case of neutral and pessimistic scenarios, in most regions, except Aragatsotn, Gegharkunik, Vayots Dzor and 311 ECONOMICS Tavush, a decrease in per capita regional GDP is forecast.
 Thus, the analysis can be used as a basis for developing a territorial development policy, providing targeted support to each region of the Republic of Armenia.
 .
