Funded by the Cairo branch of the Armenian General Benevolent Union in 2010. "Areg" periodical is published till today, which continues to fulfill the mission of the Arabic supplement of "Arev" daily.
  The key and main goal of the Arabic periodical is to present the issue of the Armenian Genocide to the Arabic-speaking reader and the Armenian generations who speak Arabic, the works on its international recognition, to expose Turkey's policy of denial.
 349 HISTORY Areg paid great attention to the coverage of different stages of the Armenian Genocide.
  The periodical exposes the policy of persecution of Armenians pursued by Abdul Hamid II, informing the reader about the rise of the Armenian liberation movement in the late 19th century, 1894-1896. Armenian massacres, 1895 on the May reform program.
  The periodical emphasizes that the great powers presented the plan of reforms to the Ottoman sultan, but did not pursue it to make it a reality [1, No 13, pages 1-5].
 1878-1923 The Arab, including Egyptian, press also covered the coverage of the various stages of the Armenian question.
 In particular, Al-Zaman newspaper covered the Armenian liberation struggle, Al-Ahram, Al-Mukaram, Al-Ray Al-Am, Al-Mushir, Al-Asiman and other Egyptian newspapers covered the Hamidian massacres. Al Maratu al-Ahwal covered the coverage of the Berlin Conference [2, No. 54, pp. 15-16].
  1894-1896 Speaking about the Armenian massacres, "Al Ray Al Am" newspaper writes that the Turks annihilated the Armenian people, massacring thousands of people every day, and those who escaped the massacres were massacred by cold and hunger [1, No 17, p. -2].
  The Egyptian "Al Adl" weekly about the period of the Young Turks in 1917. In the issue published in December 1915, he published the article "Around Armenia", which presents the memoirs of an Arab soldier of the Ottoman army, who in 1915-1917. He was in Western Armenia.
  The Arab military reports that what has been written about the Armenian massacres is a drop in the ocean.
  Besides, the military adds that the Germans helped the Ittihadists in massacring the Armenians [1, No 17, pages 1-5].
 1909 of the Armenians of Cilicia Speaking about the massacre, "Areg" refers to 1919. One of the leaders of the national movement in Egypt, Muhammad Farid, published in 1909 in Cairo "Al Lua" newspaper. In a statement issued on April 24, 1945, a prominent Egyptian public and political figure noted that the policies of the Ottoman authorities were the main reason for the KOTO 350 HISTORY, and described the victims of the massacre as "constitutional martyrs" [1, No 52, pp. 22-25 ].
 The Arabic periodical notes that during the First World War, the Young Turks genocide the Armenians at the state level by massacring and deporting them from the motherland [pages 1, No. 16, pages 7-13].
  During the years of the Armenian Genocide, the Turkish authorities forcibly converted thousands of Armenian orphans, completing their policy.
  "Areg" reports that the governor of Trabzon Cemal Azma kidnapped about 450 beautiful Armenian girls and converted them, later marrying the Turks [1, No 35, p. -2].
  The same was done by Enver Pasha, who converted hundreds of 415-year-old Armenian girls and boys exiled to the Syrian deserts, naming them after Turks [1, No 35, p. 2].
 1915-1916 The Ottoman authorities recruited about 6,000 children from Erzurum and transferred them to Ottoman army training centers, where they gradually developed a Turkish identity over the years.
  Many of these Turkified Armenians later occupied high positions in the Turkish army and took an active part in the 1960s. During the military coup in Turkey [1, No 35, p. -3].
 The Arabic periodical informs that the Armenian massacres were also accompanied by the "purchase and sale" of Armenian orphans, whom the Turks sold as slaves in the city markets.
  The price set for Armenian boys aged 5-8 was 20 cents, for Armenian girls aged 14-15 - 50 cents.
  If the Armenian child came from a famous family, its price was higher.
  The newspaper reports that 300,000 Armenians were saved from the massacres through conversion, and currently there are about two million Turkish citizens with Armenian roots [1, No 35, pages 1-5].
  It should be added that thousands of Armenians living in Turkey today hide their identities for fear of persecution, so it is difficult to say a specific number of Armenians living in Turkey.
 351 HISTORY The Arabic periodical emphasizes that the main reason for the Armenian Genocide was the ideology of Pan-Turkism, the goal of which is to create a Turkish state where Turks should dominate.
  "This means that the Ottoman Empire had to get rid of the non-Turkish element at all costs - Greeks, Kurds, Arabs and other ethnic groups [1, No 53, p. 14]," the article notes.
 The Arabic periodical also considers the economic factor as a priority among the causes of the genocide, noting that most of the Armenians in Western Armenia had rather real estate and movable property.
  Besides, the periodical notes that if there was no genocide, then why are the Ottoman archives of those years closed [1, No 23, pages 6-7].
  These archives are closed because their publication is not in the interests of the Turks.
  The Arabic periodical notes that in order to build a "New Turkey", the Ministry of Internal Affairs of 1915-1916 must be opened. archives, unless, of course, most of them have been destroyed over time [1, No 23, p. -7].
 Areg attributes Turkey's denial stance to several circumstances.
  The main reason is, first of all, the issue of compensation, as Turkey will also have to return the Armenian lands.
  Acknowledging the fact of the genocide, it will become obvious that the Turkish authorities have deceived their own and international community for decades, which will lead to the undermining of Turkey's international reputation [1, No 12, p. -3].
 Article writer Ara Ashchyan adds that it is true that the genocide was mainly committed during the existence of the Ottoman Empire, but most of the founders of the Turkish Republic, including Mustafa Kemal, also participated in that process.
  This circumstance may undermine the legal basis for the establishment of the Republic of Turkey [1, No 12, 3-4 pages].
  It should be noted that most of the Turkish society has superficial information about 1915-1927. about 1928 As part of the reforms in Turkey, a new Latin alphabet was introduced instead of the previous Arabic alphabet.
 352 HISTORY The Arabic periodical devoted a great deal of attention to the coverage of the process of international recognition of the Armenian Genocide.
  2010-2015 Positive changes were observed in this direction.
  2010 In March 1945, the Swedish parliament passed a resolution recognizing the genocides committed against Armenians, Assyrians and Greeks by the Ottoman Empire [1, No 1, pp. 11-12].
  2010 In March, another step was taken towards the international recognition of the Armenian Genocide.
  The Foreign Affairs Committee of the US Congress passed a resolution condemning the Armenian massacres committed by the Ottoman Empire during World War I.
  "Areg" periodical recalls and presents to the Arabic-speaking reader 1915. then the decisions and resolutions of the US Congress and Senate on the Armenian Genocide [1, No 1, pp. 11-13].
 2015 On April 24, the German parliament recognized the Armenian Genocide by an overwhelming majority of votes.
  This was a very important event, as Germany was an ally of the Ottoman Empire during the First World War, as well as Turkey's largest trading partner in Europe.
  In this connection, the periodical notes that finally a century later Germany recognized the fact of the Armenian Genocide [1, No 56, p. -1].
  After the decision made by the German parliament, the Turkish press was flooded with anti-German publications.
  In particular, in 2015 In an interview with the Anatolia news agency on April 26, 2012, Dean of the Faculty of History of Ataturk University Salam Kalij mentioned that there are many facts in the same German archives that confirm that thousands of Turks were massacred by Armenian armed groups.
  In this regard, "Areg" presents the memoirs of many German soldiers and diplomats, which confirm the fact of the Armenian massacres carried out by the Turks [1, No 56, 2-5 pages].
  In the article "The Armenian Question in the Memoirs of the Germans", "Areg" periodical presents the memoirs of a German citizen who died in 1916. October 10-11, 1953 in the southern regions of Turkey and northern Syria.
  The eyewitness recalls with pain that at every step there were starving Armenians who, settling in different settlements after the exile, did various hard work to survive [1, No 5, pp. 18-19].
  In this regard, the periodical notes that Germany, which was an ally of the Ottoman Empire during the First World War [1, No 5, p. 19], also has its share of guilt in the Armenian Genocide.
  In another article, the Arabic periodical introduces K. to the reader. German Ambassador to Constantinople Hoffenhol in 1915 The content of the letter sent by the German Foreign Ministry on August 12, 2012, in which the ambassador stated that "the aim of the Turkish authorities is to get rid of the Christian element.
  The organized Armenian massacres fit into this policy.
  Although the Turks are trying to justify their actions, it must be stated that the aim of the Turkish actions is to exterminate the Armenians ”[1, No 12, p. 19].
 2015 Another positive shift was observed in the direction of the recognition of the Armenian Genocide.
  2015 On April 22, 1915, the Austrian Parliament observed a minute of silence in memory of the victims of the Armenian Genocide, during which the Speaker of the Austrian Parliament announced that what had happened in 1915. April 24 is a genocide.
  Besides, during that sitting some of the deputies made a similar statement.
  It is true that this statement was not put to a vote, but it was the first important step by Austria, which was an ally of the Ottoman Empire during the First World War [1, No 56, p. -12].
 "Areg" has the honor to present to the reader the content of some French archives documenting the genocide.
 1915-1916 There is a lot of information in the French archives about the struggle for the survival of Musa Dagh.
  The Arabic periodical presents some of them, which after studying it becomes clear how the French warships transported the Armenian migrants to Port Said.
  It becomes obvious from the archives that the French authorities in 1915 In September, they were in active contact with their British counterparts, who initially refused to grant asylum to Armenians in Port Said because they could not ensure their safety.
  After long negotiations, the French finally received permission to move the Armenian migrants to Port Said.
  Although Egypt was living in difficult times at that time, the Egyptians provided great assistance to the Armenian refugee camp.
  The Sisvan School for the Education of Children was established in the camp under the auspices of the AGBU [1, pages 60,6-10].
 The Arabic periodical regularly covers in its issues the coverage of Egyptians' candidate dissertations and published books on the Armenian issue.
  In Aleppo in 2012 In connection with the book "Armenian Athletes Victims of the Armenian Genocide" published in the beginning of the 20th century, the periodical provides information about the sports life of Western Armenians.
  After the coup of the Young Turks, qualitative changes were observed in the field of sports in the Ottoman Empire.
  In particular, K. Football clubs were established in Constantinople, Izmir and other cities with a large number of Armenians, as well as "Raffi", "Araks", "Artavazd", "Vahagn" and other sports unions were established. Numerous military groups were formed from Constantinople to Van, which played an important role not only in the public life of the Western Armenians, but also in the whole of the Ottoman Empire.
  1911-1914 4 Armenian Olympic Games took place during the 19th century, during which famous Armenian athletes left their name in the sports history of the Ottoman Empire and Kemalist Turkey.
  These games, in turn, greatly contributed to 1911-1915. to the Armenian cultural and social awakening.
  Prominent Armenian athlete, writer, journalist Shavarsh Krisyan published the first sports magazine in the Ottoman Empire, "Marmnamarz", which was published in 1911-1914.
  Armenian athletes Vahram Papazyan and Mkrtich Majriyan participated in the team of the Ottoman Empire in 1912. 2541 athletes from 22 countries took part in the 5th World Olympic Games in Stockholm.
  The newspaper reports that during the Olympic Games, the flag of 355 HISTORY of the Ottoman Empire was not raised by the Armenians of Cilicia in 1909. because of the massacre [1, No 61, p. -3].
  The activities and successes of Armenian athletes and Armenian sports clubs caused the dissatisfaction of the Young Turk authorities, which in 1913-1914. Armenian sports clubs closed.
  1914 Armenian athletes, who held the honor of the Ottoman Empire high on international platforms, were not left out of the Armenian massacres.
  1915-1920 Thousands of Armenian athletes were subjected to pressure and persecution, most of whom were killed like most of the Western Armenians [1, No 61, 3-4 pages].
 Muhammad Rifat al-Imam, the editor of Areg, has made an invaluable contribution to the study of the history of the Armenian Cause and its presentation to the Arab public, presenting the history and content of the Armenian Cause to the Arab public at every opportunity.
  2013 Muhammad Rifat al-Imam delivered a conference entitled "Arab Memoirs on Ottoman Armenians in 1878-1923" during a conference organized by the Association of Arab Historians in Cairo in November 2010. During the report, the author presented the references to Armenians in the works of Arab authors in the mentioned period, in the Arab press.
  While presenting the history of the Armenian Question, the speaker quoted from Hijaz "Al Kabla", Syria "Al Asima" and "Al Takaddum", Egyptian "Al Adib" and "Al Ahram" periodicals [1, No 40, pages 16-18].
 The work of the commission set up to coordinate the activities of the 100th anniversary of the Armenian Genocide was regularly in the focus of the Arabic periodical.
  In the article "Specialists have compiled a list of 100th anniversary events in Yerevan" Harut Sassounian refers to 2013. The coverage of the conference held in Yerevan on March 2223, during which the President of the Republic of Armenia Serzh Sargsyan also made a speech.
  Areg presents all the speeches to the reader, paying special attention to the speech of the Jewish genocide scholar Yasir Aurun, where the researcher noted that although the Israeli authorities did not recognize the Armenian Genocide, a large part of the Israeli society recognizes it [1, No 33, 1- 2 pages].
 The Arab world, including Egypt and Syria, was not left out of the events dedicated to the 100th anniversary of the Armenian Genocide.
  Various cultural events, lectures were held in Egypt on that occasion, the country's authoritative newspapers published numerous publications on the Armenian Genocide.
  Besides, a delegation consisting of 55 people left for Yerevan to participate in the events.
 Arab researcher Sabit Sabra, a member of the delegation, donated to the Armenian Genocide Museum numerous documents on the Armenian refugee camp in Port Said [1, No. 56, pp. 15-16].
  2015 On April 7, the Center for Middle East Studies organized a conference dedicated to the 100th anniversary of the Armenian Genocide under the auspices of Rector Hussein Ayssi of Egypt's Shams University, which was attended by Arab intellectuals, officials, and the Armenian Ambassador to Cairo.
  In his words, the director of the center Jamal Chakran condemned the Armenian Genocide and exposed Turkey's denial.
 The RA Ambassador Armen Melkonyan made an extensive speech, who presented the process of international recognition of the Armenian Genocide.
  The report of Muhammad Rifat al-Imam is also memorable, during which the speaker touched upon the coverage of the history of the Armenian question.
  Another speaker at the conference, Arab intellectual Mahmoud Khalaf, equated the atrocities of Islamic State militants in Syria and Iraq with the actions of Turks against Armenians, calling the militants in Syria and Iraq "advanced followers" of the Ottoman Turks [1, No 58, pp. 12-17 ].
 Events dedicated to the 100th anniversary of the Armenian Genocide were also held in the Armenian Diaspora: Iraq, Iraqi Kurdistan, London, Jerusalem, Los Angeles, Istanbul, Lebanon, Israel.
  See "Areg", 2015. April, No. 56, pp. 20-22.
 357 HISTORY Despite the brutal conditions in Syria, a number of events dedicated to the memory of the victims of the genocide were held here as well.
  One of the squares in Damascus was named in honor of the "Armenian Martyrs", and the governor of Damascus announced the start of the construction of a memorial to the victims of the Armenian Genocide in the center of Damascus [1, No 56, pp. 17-19].
  In their turn, many religious leaders of the Muslim world spread announcements about the Armenian Genocide on social networks, in which the latter accepted and condemned the genocide.
  In contrast, some Muslim leaders defended Turkey.
  In particular, Yusuf Qardawi, who has a great reputation among Sunni Muslims, in 2015. In a statement issued on April 24, 2012, he expressed his support for Turkey, noting that "what happened to the Armenians is a consequence of the policy adopted by the international community."
  In addition, the Muslim religious leader reminded the West of the massacres of thousands of Muslims during the Crusades in Andalusia [1, No. 56, pp. 25-26].
 .
