Psychological pedagogical research and analysis of school management is of great interest for the formulation and development of current issues in various social sciences.
  The term school management is one of the main components of the psychological-pedagogical discipline.
  Being included in the general field of pedagogical systems management, it is of great value for the development of sociopsychological, psychological-pedagogical, age psychology, ethnopsychology and other psychological directions in the study of the field [6, 304].
 The description of the school as an important pillar of personality development becomes more significant within the high school, which participates in the socialization of adolescents and, being the last level of general education, expresses a condensed picture of adolescents' existing problems, expectations and goals.
 The vital activity of general education is regulated by the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, the Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Education", "On Pre-School Education", "On Education of Persons with Special Educational Needs", "On Education", "On State Non-Commercial Organizations" and many other related spheres. by legal acts.
 The guarantee of the vital activity of general education is the proper organization of the management of the institution.
  There are internal and external interrelated types of school management.
 Intra-school management or internal school management is considered as a kind of autonomy, as the modern school is independent and self-governing.
  However, the independence of the school does not imply any activity independent of the social environment.
  According to the RA Law on Education, the educational institution is governed by a combination of the principles of sole management and autonomy [2, Article 40/3].
 School management or intra-school management is the main guideline of school life and development, the current functions of which determine and ensure the direction of the educational institution's strategy for the future [4].
  The regulation and operation of the characteristics of the intra-school management process and the peculiarities of the school-managed subsystem constitute the general subject of school management [8, 429].
  In this sense, the general subject of high school management stands out in its essence.
  It can be seen not only as a regulation of in-school governance, but also as a link between the organization of general education and higher education and a preparatory stage for the latter's operation.
  This general theoretical proposition consists of certain specific propositions that reflect the specifics of current high school intra-school management.
  Among them are the organization of the educational process, the personnel policy, the organization of educational events and the provision of harmonious communication in the school-society.
  Identifying and classifying these features requires comprehensive management research.
 In modern progressive societies, as mentioned above, principles of pedagogical systems have been developed that are common to democratic societies and reflect the most advanced and humane fundamental ideas of modern civilization and the patterns of governance [7, 701].
  These include the democratization of governance, systematization or integrity, the principle of comparison of implemented programs, the rational combination of centralization and decentralization, the combination of sole management and collegiality, and the objectivity and completeness of the information provided.
 These principles reflect the psycho-pedagogical approaches to the management of basic education, including high school 86, and receive a unique interpretation and emphasis for each sub-stage of basic education (elementary school, middle school, high school).
 The observance of the principle of democracy in the field of general education is mentioned among the principles of the state policy of general education and is enshrined in Article 5 of the Law on General Education [3, art. 5].
  The principle of democratization of management is one of the basic theoretical ideas of the psycho-pedagogical discipline, which implies the organization and promotion of interaction between different parties involved in the educational process (principal, teaching staff, students, community), subject-object relationship to subject-subject interactive Application of transparency mechanisms on a regular basis and registration of student progress.
  Through the principle of democratization of school management, cooperation in the school-community is strengthened, information on school management becomes available and public, and community representatives can participate not only in school representation events or various school support programs, but also in meetings and meetings discussing school issues.
  Thus, the principles of openness, transparency and accountability are separated in the set of basic principles of democratic governance.
  In order to determine the degree of democratization of the school, it is necessary to conduct regular monitoring, publish regular reports of the school board, apply the mechanism of open days and thus promote the most effective interaction of the leader-teacher-student-parent relationship.
 The principle of systematic management or integrity of the school derives from the ideological approach of the previous principle and aims to direct the school activities in the direction of developing more effective mechanisms.
  A systematic, joint review of all subordinate school management systems allows for a comprehensive management policy where individual or group interests are not preferred, but are viewed in the context of a single system and are mutually agreed upon.
  The need for coordination does not imply the existence of tolerance.
  On the contrary, the tendency to view the school as a single system presupposes, first, the separation of the different subsystems of that system and a clear description of their functions.
  Only in this way can the result of effective interaction and mutual assistance be achieved between the subsystems.
  Such subsystems can be considered the school administration, teaching staff, students, parents and community groups, which, in turn, are also separated by gender, age, professional, social and other statuses.
 Therefore, the system or integrity of school management necessarily depends on the correct description of the sub-components, subsystems, functions included in that complex system, and a flexible management approach to them.
 Summarizing the above, it is possible to present the principles of school management according to certain characteristics.
  We distinguish the following groups of characteristics: Principles of internal and external management of the school, principles of management of the educational and extracurricular process, principles of management of educational and administrative processes.
 Based on the principle of managing the internal and external environments of the school, the multi-layered relationships between leader-teacher-learner-parent-community are revealed, which are rich in numerous social-psychological and pedagogical questions and approaches.
  Due to the discovery of this principle, both the in-school psychological-pedagogical relations are described, as well as the extension of the school-society multi-layered relations [5, 239].
 The school strategy is built on the principle of management of the educational and extracurricular process, the direction and specialization of the high school, the immediate and distant goals are determined and a connection is established between the educational and extracurricular processes.
 The principle of management of educational and administrative processes complements the approaches of the previous two groups of characteristics, as it presupposes the organization and operation of the educational environment through the management of the in-school administrative structure, without which it is impossible to imagine the existence of any school system.
 It should be added that the three theoretical groups of characteristics of the above-mentioned principles of school governance include the principles of democracy, systematization, collegial and individual governance and coordination of programs, as well as all derivative principles of effective social governance that contribute to school life and development.
 88 Based on these principles, the main functions of intra-school management are formed.
 Thus, the above-mentioned features and principles of governance express the essence of high school governance as a three-tier model.
  As it turned out, the basic principles of high school management are viewed first under the general process of social management, then under the school management process, and finally under the high school management process.
 .vvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv
