The non-financial results of the activities of the organizations have always been subjected, and now they are presented in accounting, and in different dimensions.
  Thus, operative accounting represents the use of employees' working time, the organization's raw materials and materials costs, and daily balances.
  Analytical accounting represents the quantitative movement of inventories, the allocation of fixed assets, the internal mobility of equipment, the quantitative changes of fast-moving items, the flow of personnel, etc.
  And it seems that the provision of non-financial information already operates in the accounting system [1].
 However, from the point of view of management decision-making, this information is insufficient, especially when it comes to the interests of external users of reports and assessments of the competitiveness of organizations' business.
  As a rule, traditional non-financial accounting is aimed at satisfying the internal interests of the organization, protection of assets, making decisions aimed at the smoothness of the production process.
 Therefore, no particular attention has been paid to the accountability of non-financial results of economic activities addressed to external users of information, until the need to do so in the last decade in the field of ensuring the competitive position of organizations.
  Already in the last decade, external stakeholders of organizations have become interested not only in financial reporting indicators, but also in non-financial accountability, which is encouraging sustainable development and strengthening competitive position in the narrow economic and public interests of business, such as environmental issues, social sphere, state Fulfillment of public obligations undertaken by organizations, solutions to business problems, business behavior towards partners, etc.
  It is for these reasons that the task of managing the accounting of non-financial results and submitting the relevant reports is currently set.
 International financial reporting does not explicitly require the submission of information on non-financial performance of organizations.
  In parallel, however, the annual reporting package may provide not only non-financial explanations of corporate interests but also public non-financial results related to the entity's operations.
  These are mainly the comments of the management, which aim to strengthen the good reputation of the organization among the internal and external stakeholders of the organization.
  And that is why the non-financial information presented in such a way is not systemic and is often presented with the positive aspects of the organization's activities, bypassing the negative manifestations.
  [2] In view of all this, we propose to manage the non-financial and positive and negative results of the activities of the organizations, thus creating an information basis for management decisions to increase competitiveness.
  But on the other hand, if non-financial results are included in the management accounting system, they must be comparable in the same measurements, have the same standard in order to be re-recorded in the accounts.
  And mainly, the non-financial results of economic activity are presented in different measures (kg, m, liter, md / day, hour, etc.), which makes it difficult to present them in a comparable field, especially systematic accounting.
 MANAGEMENT In this regard, in order to record the non-financial results of economic activities of organizations, we propose the following steps: - clarify the scope of non-financial information by grouping the indicators to be accounted for by sector; - present non-financial information comparably; Non-financial information flows - record non-financial results on a double entry basis, thus coordinating them in the aggregate account and enabling them to submit a consolidated report.
 The non-financial results of the activities of organizations may differ in their priorities, depending on the specific nature of the business.
  Thus, if the business is related to the mining industry, then the non-financial information related to the environmental activities of the organization should have its own accountability.
 [3] And when the business sector of the organization is agritourism, then the non-financial results of the activity are mostly related to the social development of the community, the creation of new jobs.
 [4] Accountability for the results of non-financial activities of joint stock companies may include indicators such as the effectiveness of corporate governance, the degree of satisfaction of shareholders, the presence of corporate culture, etc.
 113 MANAGEMENT Table 1 Scope of non-financial performance indicators of organizations involved in agri-food sector Meaning Indicator valuation approaches Indicators Corporate interest protection Debt consolidation Entrepreneurship Stakeholder management Participation in the group Execution Positive Credit History Results of Corporate Governance Rights Surveys Survey Results of Shareholder Management Surveys Survey of Vulnerable Groups of Vulnerable Groups of EmployeesAnnual Growth of the Company's Annual Growth Income of the Company's Employees Surveys of the Company's External Partners Position of Positive Credit History 114 MANAGEMENT Customer-centered Activities Among Customers (Buyers) Sociological Outcomes Product Quality Assurance Quality Assurance Expanding New Markets Expanding Customer Surveys Specific Weight of Environmental Expenditures Cost Costs of Environmental Expenditures Costs Results of Non-Financial Activities of Agri-Food Organizations Also a Special Framework for Formationhave, which are presented in Table 1.
  Moreover, this range of non-financial indicators is not stable and may change due to drastic changes in the competitive business environment.
 In practice, the presentation of non-financial information on comparable measures and their evaluation by a single global indicator is also a problem (see Figure 1).
  The effectiveness of controlling non-financial results is significantly increased when the related information flows become comparable, especially when these flows provide an opportunity to form an aggregate indicator that summarizes the results of non-financial activities of organizations.
 In our opinion, relative indicators - coefficients or percentages - can be used as general measures of non-financial results.
  In this regard, we consider it expedient to convert the non-financial indicators of the activities of the organized 115 government in various indicators into relative indicators, in particular, coefficients, which would create an opportunity to transfer them to a comparable field.
  Moreover, in this case we find it expedient to apply the principle of maximum aspiration, according to which the closer the index calculated on a specific indicator is to one, the more it strives for the maximum level of targeting.
  The presentation of non-financial results in this way creates an analytical environment where the assessed indicators become comparable and it is possible to record them in a systematic double entry, including in the management accounting accounts.
 Therefore, there is a need to use new management accounts and accounting correspondence for the accounting of non-financial information, which will operate independently of the financial accounting framework with a non-integrated approach.
  In this regard, we propose to open a separate management account for each indicator of non-financial results, where double registration will record the maximum and actual values ​​of expectations, in comparison with which the deviations of non-financial indicators related to the activity of the organization will be revealed.
  Systematic accounting information for these deviations will serve as a basis for accounting for non-financial results, as well as for sound management decisions.
 116 MANAGEMENT Figure 1. Proposed Mechanism for Managing Accounts for Non-Financial Income Management Accounting Deviations Consolidated by Ratio Indicators Maximum Non-Financial Outcomes Quantities Non-Financial Income Accounts by Sector , where there are special accounts to summarize the information on the non-financial results of the opened organization (corporate interests, social expectations, business behavior, quality assurance, etc.).
  Moreover, those accounts are closed at the end of the reporting period, presenting the information reflected in them in the following format: Expectations = Actual Achievement (+, -) Deviations 117 MANAGEMENT Table 2 Ratios of Non-Financial Performance of Agri-Food Organizations Assignment Indicators Protection of Shareholder Rights Involvement of Socially Vulnerable Groups in Business Expected Performance of Partnerships Omnipotent Performance B Deviations Thus, Table 2 presents the indicators of non-financial results related to the activities of the organizations involved in the agri-food complex of cheese production.
  This information is the basis for the relevant accounting correspondence, coordinating the information on non-financial results in terms of "expected results and deviations from them". 1. The intended result of the protection of shareholders' rights has been formulated Dt Non-financial result (X 11) ........... 1,0 Kt Consolidated non-financial results ...... 1,0 118 MANAGEMENT Formulated for shareholders Actual rights protection results Dt Consolidated non-financial results ...... 0.85 Kt Non-financial result (X 11) ........................ ..0,85 3. Deviations from the intended results of protection of shareholders' rights Dt Non-financial result (X 11) ........... 0,25 Kt Consolidated non-financial results ...... 0, 25 4.
 Thus, the credit turnover of the proposed management account shows that in the reporting period, five areas reflecting the non-financial activities of the organizations were considered.
  Debit turnover is presented in terms of actual results of non-financial activities and deviations from the planned, which provides an opportunity to assess the achievements and shortcomings of the organization in each area and provides 120 MANAGEMENT information for management decisions.
  At the end of the reporting period, after completing the consolidation of the non-financial results of the organizations, the management account is closed (see Figure 3.3.3) and reopened for the next reporting period.
 .
