Domestic violence is one of the most pressing issues in modern society, as it relates to family relationships and is perpetrated by those whom the victim trusts, loves, and expects help and support from.
  Domestic violence is common to all countries, without exception.
 States try to combat domestic violence by various means, including criminal law.
  Specific articles on domestic violence as a crime include Vietnam, Honduras, the Dominican Republic, India, Spain, the People's Republic of China, Colombia, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Serbia, El Salvador, San Marino, Slovakia, and Slovakia. in the Criminal Code [1], [page 190].
 JURISDICTION The crimes of domestic violence are a typical example of additional criminalization, as they apply to acts that, as a rule, already contain the crime of a certain crime (beating, torture, harm to health, etc.), but are criminalized based on the subjects. and object properties by setting special settings.
  For example, under Article 229 of the Criminal Code of Colombia, the punishment provided for in the article on domestic violence is applied if the criminal's actions lead to a more severe punishment provided by other articles.
  The General Part of the Spanish Criminal Code, in addition to aggravating and mitigating circumstances, also provides for mixed kinship circumstances.
  Thus, according to Article 23 of the Spanish Criminal Code, depending on the manner, motives and consequences of the act, the aggravated liability may be the fact that the victim is or has been the offender's spouse or a person with whom the offender had a stable emotional relationship. or an ascending and descending relative or the biological or adopted children of the offender or a person living with the spouse / spouse or offender.
 Article 222 1 1 of the French Criminal Code provides for the crime of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, punishable by up to fifteen years' imprisonment.
  The act is punishable by life imprisonment if it was combined with or followed by a crime other than murder or rape (Article 222 2 2).
  The act provided for in part 1 of Article 222 of the Code is considered committed in an aggravating circumstance, if, among other aggravating circumstances, the victim is a blood relative, adoptive father, mother, husband or wife, up or down relative.
  Part 7 of the same article envisages the crime of negligently causing death by violence, the aggravating circumstance of which is the commission of an act against a blood relative, adoptive father or mother, husband or wife, up or down relative.
 In contrast to foreign criminal law, which provides for certain crimes of domestic violence or aggravating circumstances by a member of the family under articles on crimes against humanity, the RA Code does not define a separate crime of domestic violence or does not consider it an aggravating circumstance, except some crimes against children.
  Certain articles of the section on crimes against humanity of the RA Criminal Code are characterized as separate manifestations of violence against each other by family members.
  These are murder (Article 104), murder committed in a state of extreme emotional distress (Article 105), murder of a newborn child by the mother (Article 106), suicide (Article 110), suicidal ideation (Article 111). Article 10), intentional infliction of grievous bodily harm (Article 112), intentional infliction of moderate grievous bodily harm (Article 113), intentional infliction of light damage to health (Article 117), beating (Article 118), unlawful release from prison deprivation (Article 133), threat of murder, grievous bodily harm or destruction of property (Article 137), rape (Article 138), sexual violence (Article 139), coercion of sexual acts (Article 140) Article),sexual intercourse with a person under the age of sixteen or sexual acts against a person under the age of sixteen (Article 141), obscene acts (Article 142), etc.
 Referring to the relationship between domestic violence and criminal violence, it should be noted that despite the fact that the need to put the term "criminal violence" into circulation has long arisen in the 13 LEGAL SCIENCES, the RA criminal legislation does not yet provide a legal definition.
 Many articles of the Special Part of the RA Criminal Code envisage "violence", "violent acts", "violence dangerous / life-threatening / non-dangerous".
  However, the concept of violence is not clarified both in international legal documents and in the RA criminal legislation.
  The content of the concept of "violence" is clarified in the field of criminal law.
  However, even in these conditions there are disagreements between the positions of different authors [2, p. 4].
 There are various interpretations of violence in the professional literature.
 For example, P.N. Nazarov noted that "in the criminal sense, violence is an act committed voluntarily, publicly dangerous, illegal, guilty, physical or psychological force, which violates public relations, which are protected by the norms set out in a special part of the Criminal Code and causes damage to them." or puts them under threat, being expressed within the limits of its volume and intensity determined by law ”[3, p. 91].
 AA Piontkowski writes that in the doctrine of criminal law "the coercive influence on an individual lies in any compulsion to take actions contrary to his wishes" [4, p. 161].
  If we are based on the criminal doctrine of violence, then violence should be considered in the realm of the person, as it is used only when committing this or that specific crime against a person.
 R.A. Giving the definition of violence, Bazarov emphasizes its intentional nature and the possibility of using it directly or indirectly. "Violence is the intentional use of physical force (with the help of muscle force or any weapon, other objects or materials, the mentally ill, minors or animals) against another person and is aimed at violating a person's physical immunity, harm to health or life" [5 , pp. 42-43].
 Although different definitions of violence include different features of criminal violence, they all have one thing in common: physical or psychological impact on another person.
  Moreover, the use of force against inanimate objects (particularly property), animals, the organization as a legal entity and, finally, one's own person is not included in the concept of violence.
 That is, only a person can be the subject of violence.
 As D.R. According to Hunanyan, the definition of the concept of violence is quite possible, and its existence in the criminal legislation is both a scientific and a practical necessity, and he gave the following definition of criminal violence. "Violence is an act committed intentionally and against the will of another or without taking into account the will of another, which has unlawfully deprived another of life, restricted another's liberty, or caused harm to another's health, or caused physical pain, physical or mental suffering and for the purpose of committing a crime ”[2, p. 177].
 The draft of the RA Criminal Code enshrines the following definition of violence in Article 1, Part 1, Clause 9: "Violence - the deliberate physical assault on another person or the infliction of physical or mental harm on him / her in such a way, which is done against his / her will or by ignoring his / her will" [6].
 A study of all the definitions shows that there are several types of criminal violence: life-threatening violence, violence in general, violence dangerous to health, non-life-threatening violence, non-life-threatening violence, violence, and so on.
 Based on the above, it is suggested to define "violence" as follows: "Violence is the deliberate physical / psychological influence on another person's anatomical integrity, freedom or inviolability, or in so doing inflicting physical or mental harm on him or her against his or her will."
  This definition is more complete in violence and will provide a wider application in practice.
 Domestic violence, being a type of violence, has both criminal and non-criminal manifestations.
  Certain manifestations of domestic violence are criminally punishable, and some manifestations are not considered a crime or constitute misdemeanors or other offenses because of the lesser importance of publicly dangerous consequences.
 Therefore, in order to find out the manifestations of domestic violence prohibited by the criminal law and the ratio of criminal violence, it is necessary to reveal their features in comparison.
 Based on the above definitions and features of criminal violence, as well as comparing the features of criminal violence and domestic violence, we can confidently declare that domestic violence is a type of violence, and its publicly dangerous forms prohibited by criminal law are a type of criminal violence.
  That is, the ratio of crime and domestic violence is in the ratio of whole and part.
 Domestic violence is characterized by all the main features that characterize criminal violence: intentional act, illegality, action against the will of another or without taking into account the will of another, being directed against a person, etc.
  The object of both criminal and domestic violence is social relations aimed at protecting human life, health, physical freedom and inviolability from physical pain, physical and mental suffering.
  In any case, the values ​​or goods that are the object of public relations that are the object of crime are human life, health, physical freedom and inviolability, protection from physical pain, physical and mental suffering.
 The subject of direct influence of criminal violence and domestic violence is a person who is at the same time a party to the public relations that is the object of criminal violence and a direct bearer of a specific value or good.
  Thus, by committing murder, a person influences another person, who also embodies the value of life.
 That is, as a result of criminal violence and domestic violence, the value of the object, in connection with which the public relationship that is the object of violence has arisen, is always damaged.
 The subject of criminal violence can be considered a sane natural person who has reached the age defined by the criminal law at the time of committing criminal violence.
  Of course, in the case of criminal violence, the ideas of a special subject and complicity also apply.
  The subject of domestic violence is always special, as the act prohibited by criminal law is committed by a person who is a family member.
  For example, such a wording is given in sexual crimes as an aggravating circumstance as follows: "Has been committed against a person under the age of eighteen by a parent or pedagogue or an employee of an educational or medical or educational institution or another person who has the responsibility of his / her upbringing or care."
  That is, even stepchildren or other members of the family who are responsible for their upbringing or care are also a special subject of this crime.
 17 JURISDICT Finally, both criminal and domestic violence are one of the means by which many basic human rights, in particular the right to life, can be violated and, in general, harm to a number of goods, such as human health and freedom.
  The far-reaching consequences are more.
 Thus, based on the above, the following suggestions can be made: քրեական In the criminal laws of foreign countries, particularly Spain, Colombia, France, domestic violence is envisaged both as an independent crime and as an aggravated crime, բռ violence against family members Separate manifestations of harassment are qualified by certain articles of the section on crimes against humanity of the RA Criminal Code.
  They are: 104th, 105th, 106th, 108th, 110th, 111th, 112th, 113th, 114th, 115th, 116th of the RA Criminal Code. 117th, 118th, 119th, 123rd, 124th, 131st, 133rd, 135th, 136th, 137th, 138th, 139th, 140- Articles 141, 142 and 142, therefore, it is necessary to supplement the articles provided in the section on crimes against humanity of the RA Criminal Code with the part envisaging aggravating circumstances with the following content: "committed by a family member" by specifically defining the circle of family members or referring to: The definition given in Article 4 of the RA Law on Prevention of Domestic Violence, Protection of Victims of Domestic Violence and Restoration of Family SolidarityՔում In the RA Criminal Code, "violence" should be defined as follows: "Violence is the intentional physical / psychological influence on another person's anatomical integrity, freedom or inviolability, or thus causing physical or mental harm to him or her against his or her will or disregarding his or her will." ».
 .
