Due to the development of the methodological base of psychological diagnosis, it is now possible to study several phenomena at the same time, both projectively and through tests and psychological conversation.
  With such an approach, the problems related to deprivation can be comprehensively studied.
 It is assumed that deprivation causes certain negative changes in individuals, in particular, the deprivation experienced in childhood affects the process of self-realization of an adult and the realization of the value system, hindering it.
  We have planned an experimental study to find out those obstacles.
 The objects of our research are twenty-three to thirty-year-old people who have experienced parental deprivation in childhood (up to 10 years old).
  Parental Deprivation 447 When we say PSYCHOLOGY, we mean all its types, both the general absence of a parent and the deprivation caused by a lack of parental role.
  The aim of the research is to find out whether deprived people have problems on the way to self-realization and realization of the value system that are not found in people who do not have parental deprivation.
  The research is carried out using a number of methods described in the article.
 The idea of ​​what self-realization is and who the self-realized persons are was developed by A. Based on a logical study of the lives, values ​​and communication characteristics of mentally healthy, creative and happy people by Maslow.
  A. Maslow's theory of self-realization is one of the most popular and influential concepts in modern psychology.
 The first attempt to diagnose self-esteem was made by Maslow's student Everett Shostrem, who in 1963 published the POI (Response Orientation Inventory).
  It is based on the ideas of Maslow and other existentialist humanist psychologists.
  It included two main scales of a person's orientation: the first (temporal), which shows how a person lives in the present, leaving his goals for tomorrow and not trying to return to the past, and the second (support and support), which measures the person. the ability to rely on oneself and not on other people's expectations or assessments.
  In addition, the methodology also includes 10 additional scales that evaluate such properties as:  self-esteem,։ spontaneity,  everyday values, դրական positive views on human nature.
 There are four customized Russian versions of the questionnaire.
  The adaptations differ in the number and wording of the questions, the number and scale of the scales, 448 PSYCHOLOGY as well as the comments.
  The original includes 150 questions and 14 scales.
 The fourth customized version to be used in our study was created in 1998 by N.F. By Kalina, in the standardization and ratification of which A. participated. V. Lazukin.
  This method has been developed taking into account the peculiarities of self-realization in a transitional society.
  In addition, the structure of the questionnaire (types of scales) and the wording of diagnostic judgments have undergone significant changes.
 The method includes 100 pairs of statements, one of which must be selected.
 It consists of 11 measuring scales.
 1. Orientation in time 2. Scale of values ​​3. Perceptions of human nature 4. High demand for knowledge 5. Striving to create, 6. Autonomy 7. Spontaneity 8. Self-awareness 9. Self-esteem, 10. Scale of communication 11. Flexibility in communication scale [4, pp. 297-302].
 The method, in its turn, was adapted into Armenian by the Psychology Laboratory of Personality and Professional Activity of Yerevan State University.
 We found it expedient to use this test, which reveals the level of self-realization, for a number of reasons.  The results are displayed in percentages, which gives a clearer idea of ​​the factor of each scale in a person. , than non-deprivated individuals, while others, such as perceptions of human nature, sociability, flexibility in communication, on the contrary, have lower scores.
  These traits are the basis for the study and evaluation of the personal characteristics of depressed individuals.
 The next method we want to present in this article is D. A. Leontev's test of bio-semantic orientations (Смысложизненные orientation, СОО) is a test that allows you to assess the "source" of the meaning of life.
  It can be either in the future (goal), or in the present (process) or in the past (result), or in all three components of life at the same time.
  It is a customized version of the Purposein-Life Test (PIL) by James Crambo and Leonard Makholik.
  The methodology was developed based on the theories of the pursuit of meaning and Victor Frankl's therapies, with the aim of empirically validating a number of the ideas presented in these theories.
 The essence of these ideas is that the failure to find meaning in life (existential frustration) and the resulting sense of loss of meaning (existential vacuum) can be the cause of a special class of mental illness.
 The first Russian-language adapted version was created by K. By Muzdibayev, who translated the test with very minor changes.
  The next Russian version was developed and adapted by D. A. By Lentev in 1966-1968.
  Muzdibayev's version was taken as a basis and changed according to the following 3 criteria. The wording of a number of points has been changed and simplified, keeping the content.
  In contrast to the original, instead of the general beginning of the sentence and the two final versions, a pair of complete alternative sentences with the same beginning were formed, the evaluation methods and the calculation of the results according to gender and age were changed.
 450 PSYCHOLOGY The test includes 5 scales. 1. Purpose of life 2. Course of life 3. Outcome of life 4. Self-control (I am the master of life).
 5. Life-control (life control) [3].
 It is assumed that people who have had parental deprivation as children have a number of problems with the existence of life goals, choices, and assessments of meaning in the way of realizing the meaning of life.
  This method allows the researcher to identify the presence or absence of these problems, as well as to address the issue of both the past and present life satisfaction, the existence of future goals and state perceptions of life control.
 The next method used in the study is the Dayto Stress Test.
  DST is a method of stress detection and qualification, which allows to identify the degree of stress expression of people aged 18 and over.
  DST includes 50 organic and personal manifestations, which are grouped into three profiles.
  They are: դրսեւոր profile of personal manifestations։ profile of personal needs պրոֆ profile of personal abilities After passing the test, the results of each profile are calculated, turning them into% indicators.
  The final result is the sum of the percentage of the three profiles.
  The interpretation of the test is given in two ways: by the results of the calculation and by the evaluation indicators.
  The calculation includes the sum of points for each profile.
  The assessment corresponds to one of the four main levels of stress: mild (20-39%), moderate (40-59%), pronounced (60-79%) and extreme (80-100%) and presents the possibilities of stress management.
 451 PSYCHOLOGY The study used an adapted Armenian version of the Dayto Stress Test, which was tested and localized by the staff of YSU Chair of General Psychology, Personnel and Professional Activity and Experimental Psychology Laboratories [1].
 There are many tests to determine the level of stress, stress resilience, but for the purpose of the study, we can argue that it allows not only to determine the overall level of stress, but also to perform multidisciplinary analysis to determine the frequency of physical and psychological manifestations of stress, satisfaction and ability. development.
  Such an analysis allows us to narrow the circle and see what is the cause of a person's stress and, of course, to identify the means of overcoming it.
  At the end of the Dayto Stress Test, there is a strategic stress management guide that guarantees the most support based on stress levels.
 Thus, in the framework of the article we tried to substantiate the choice of research methods and their expediency.
  It is assumed that there is a positive correlation between the level of self-realization of a person and the realization of the value system.
  That is, the lower the percentage results of the self-realization scales, the lower the results of the components of the realization of the meaning of a person's life.
  The chosen methods will allow to confirm or reject such a hypothesis.
 .
