Populism has become one of the most widely used and widespread words in the modern world.
  The problem is conditioned by political and social realities, which also leave their response in the fields of art and literature.
  The word "populism" can be interpreted in two main ways: traditional and modern.
 According to the traditional perception, populism is interpreted as mob rule, the illusion of cheap democracy, popularism.
  Modern perceptions and definitions of populism are different, according to which populism is perceived as an ideology aimed at the lower socio-economic strata of society, with the accumulation of common features of the populism of the past [1].
 Modern populism is also the opposite of elitism, according to which the people are seen as a danger and it must be ruled by the elite.
  And either populism is a policy for ordinary people, led by extraordinary (extraordinare) leaders, creating the illusion of simplicity, ordinaryness, society [3, p. 13].
  According to the above, populism in the traditional perception acts as a style - rhetoric, according to the modern perception - as a narrow ideology with its two wings - right populism and left populism.
 According to the second definition, as a narrow ideology, populism is built on a dichotomy, the opposition between us and them, the ordinary, pure people and the political, corrupt elite.
  However, this contradiction is sometimes based not only on national conditions and borders, but also on the poles of civilization, which is very typical of Western civilizations, especially when it comes to the opposition between Christianity and Islam, such as populist movements such as Christianity. , secularism (secularism) and liberalism [3, pp. 17-18].
  Theorists link the preconditions of modern populism with some political events, in particular the British Brexit vote and the election of Donald Trump as President of the United States.
  Accordingly, in 2017, the word populism is declared the word of the year in the Cambridge dictionary.
  New formulations are emerging that are directly related to the phenomenon of populism, such as Chavism (named after Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez), a phenomenon that embraces socialism and populism, Orbանիզմnism (named after Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orb )n), interpreted as a populist and is a mixture of naturalism [3, p. 16].
  The use of the word populism became especially widespread in the Armenian reality during and after the April 2018 revolution.
  In this regard, it is enough to search for the word "populism" on youtube. "Pashinyan can join the RPA to become prime minister, the other steps are populism."
 "This was a process from dictatorship to democracy. "The dose of populism should be weakened", Pashinyan's dose of populism "has sharpened the biz". "People's unrest is maturing" and so on.
  In fact, in the modern Armenian reality, 51 populism continues to be purely as rhetoric, being used in its most primitive sense.
  An exception can be considered the series of lectures organized by "Bun TV" within the framework of "Populism and propaganda in Armenia".
 In this regard, Hrant Der-Abrahamian's article "This sweet word - populism" is also noteworthy, in which the author tries to comment on the phenomenon of populism, which has been so widely manipulated lately. "What is this evil populism after all?"
  It is basically the Latin word "populus" - "people".
  In other words, populism simply means popularity.
  It is a surprising political curse for a century whose official religion is democracy.
  Why is "popularity" not only a bad thing (which would also be surprising), but also the most reprehensible, negative political assessment in the age of "democracy"?
  How can popularity really be so opposed to democracy?
  There must be a secret, a hidden drama, even a tragedy in the nuances of comedy ... An interesting connection is created between Armenia and the world "populist" tendency.
  Nothing happens outside of his time and against the spirit of his time.
  The Armenian revolution coincided with the change of atmosphere in the world.
 Even in the number one country in the world, the "populist" came to power.
  In other words, the American people have made a "wrong" choice.
  If he had made the right choice, the chosen one would have been a "democrat", but the wrong popular choice is "populism".
  We do not care at all whether Trump is good or bad in this case, we do not discuss the people, but the tendencies and structures ... The real problem, of course, is clear.
  This is the problem of the "smile of the augurs" or the fairy tale "the king is naked".
 The Avgurs were a class of ancient Roman priests who practiced divination by following the flight of birds.
  This was traditionally considered a high state function, for which high-ranking officials and the sons of the best families were augurs.
  Naturally, during the heyday of Rome, no one seriously believed that the observations of birdwatchers could solve serious state problems.
  But the tradition was preserved, and according to Cicero (in the language of Kocharyan's fakes, Tsitsiron), who was also an augur, the priests could not restrain their smiles while looking at each other. "[4]
 Another issue that interests us is how populism and culture relate.
  According to Jansma Judith, populism "rejects culture" as a waste of time and money.
  Meanwhile, culture perceives populism as a contradictory, foreign element, phenomenon.
  In this sense, culture is often a means of better understanding, perceiving and understanding the patterns and dangers of populism.
  Studies show that the strengthening of the ideology of populism in different countries is accompanied by a direct response to fiction, such as in the United States in 2016. After the presidential elections J. Orwell's "1984" anti-utopia has long been considered the absolute bestseller in the Amazon.
  Michelle Welbeck's novel "Obedience" received such a great response in France.
  A similar "book boom" arose in connection with Nikol Pashinyan's novel "The Opposite Side of the Earth" in Armenia .
 We are most interested in three issues in the relationship between populism and fiction. a. Is it possible for literature, becoming an instrument in the hands of the ruling society, to acquire populist emphases with the aim of ideologically manipulating and directing the masses? To what extent does literature participate in the formation and spread of populist ideology? c. Is it possible that literature itself is populist?
 a. In the context of the first question, we will probably refer to "Socialist Realism". direction, which was first announced in 1923. in one of the issues of "Literaturnaya Gazeta" newspaper in May.
  The newspaper published the information "Let's provide all the conditions for the creative activity of literary groups", in which it is said in particular: "It is necessary not to present the question about the method in the abstract, not to approach it in such a way that the writer must first pass the courses of dialectical materialism, and then create a new one.
  The main requirement for writers is to write about the truth, to truly reflect our reality, which is itself dialectical.
  Therefore, the main method of Soviet literature is socialist realism ”[5, p. 249].
 The aesthetic goal of social realism was the upbringing of the Socialist individual (Gorky).
 The true, concrete-historical reflection of reality in its revolutionary development.
 Full coverage of the poisonous, nightmarish disgust of the past.
 The book was published in 2018. on May 31.
  Almost a year later, the book continues to be the absolute leader in the list of best-selling books.
  To date, 7,000 copies of the book have been sold.
 The awakening of a proud happy pathos, which was to give a new color to literature.
 The populist songs of social realism were also manifested in the following: both in art and in culture, one basic principle had to work: he who is not with us, is against us, which allowed the Marxists to create after the coming to power of the intelligentsia. to carry out pressures, persecutions, to label them, to limit the manifestations of freedom and humanism.
 b. According to the second question, to what extent literature is involved in the formation and spread of populist ideology, some analysts believe that literature can be a "fuel" for political populist ideology, for example, the influence of Michelle Welbeck's novel "Obedience" by Marine Leh. During the election campaign (Marine Le Pen).
  "Obedience" is not an inflammatory word, but a convincing theory of the end of European civilization, its culture, and its democracy (Begle).
  In this connection, Welbeck's confession is interesting, according to which: "The word populism was invented, or rather it was repaired, because it was no longer possible to accuse some parties of fascism, which would be very wrong.
  ... Thus, a new insult is created - populism.
  Yes, I think I am a populist.
  I want the people to solve all the problems ”[3, p. 41].
 In the Armenian reality, perhaps, N. played the role of such "fuel". Pashinyan's novel "The Opposite Side of the Earth", which, as we know, was also one of the motives of the revolution. "January 2018 ... Reading the novel 10 years later just upset me.
  A real storm started inside me, a real revolution.
  And I realized that the time for the victory of the people has come. "[6]
  The novel is completely based on the principle of dichotomy, opposing high and low ideas at the artistic level, and at the political level, opposing the principle of populist ideology: "We must build our free homeland, we must build the future of our homeland."
 But wait, who are those "We" (emphasis added-AS-B), who are part of it?
  Maybe the forces involved in the "Impeachment" bloc - "ANM", "PPA", maybe "Republic" or the Armenian National Congress. The novel was published by a surprising coincidence on January 7, 2015, the very day when Al Qaeda committed A terrorist attack on the French "Charlie Hebdo" daily, as a result of which 12 employees died.
  On that very day, the issue of the newspaper was published with a picture of Welbeck, under which it was written: "In 2022, I did" Ramadan ".
 54 forces involved.
  What nonsense!
  What a disgusting process of thoughts, what a temptation to which the rulers of Armenia today have given hopelessly.
  They, the forces in the coalition and their direct and indirect supporters, do nothing else, they build the country of their dreams, "We are building the country of our dreams," they say.
  So what is the problem?
  The problem is that the "we" they say includes representatives of the elite of several parties - oligarchs, palace intellectuals.
  Their (emphasis is ours-AS-B) We include 10,000, good 20,000, good 100,000 people, while the country has 3,000,000 citizens in Armenia or abroad.
  The country they built meets those 100,000 desires.
  It is the country of 100,000 dreams ... And who should be included in "We"? Every citizen of Armenia ... Our dream country is the dream country of three million people, and each of those three million should have the freedom and opportunity to voice their dreams, to mix their dreams with the dreams of others, to mix with the common dream, to participate in the formation of the common dream. "[6, pp. 65-67].
 c. Referring to the third question, the fact that literature itself is populist, it is necessary to consider the pop-art phenomenon, which is one of the main forms of popularization of art and literature.
  Pop art (popular-populus - popular folk art) originated in the United States in the 1950s.
  Popart opposes elite, objectless, immaterial art, declares the principle of return to reality.
  The principle of documentary is based on presenting the reality with its photographic and documentary accuracy.
  The main subject of the depiction are real, famous people, popular events, printed images, etc.
  "However, pop art, like the currents of modernism that preceded it, is confined to self-sufficient formal experiments and is also far from a realistic representation of reality and is, in fact, anti-art."
 As we see, literature and art are modeling systems, we mean what started in art, only a few decades later it is only openly manifested in political and social life.
  Anti-elitism is also one of the main principles of pop art.
  Marco Baravalle argues that documentary and anti-elitism are manifestations of populism in fiction and art.
  The use of populist forms in art usually leads to anti-intellectual orientation through the primitive application of national folklore.
  In the context of the above, studying the latest realities in Armenian literature, it becomes obvious the frequent use of documentary, anti-elitism and 55 folklore elements in literary texts.
 Thus, obvious elements of documentary content are Karen Gharslyan's latest documentary tragicomedy "The Regime is in Panic" (2019), Hovhannes Tekgyozyan's novel "Third Sex" with "semi-documentary" four-act stories, Vardan Danielyan's "Documentary Poetry 2018" We always lean on the subway doors, because there is no other pillar in the country, we who always get lost in the Friendship underpass, where Brazilian coffee is free, we who are used to standing at rallies, because we stand on the bus every day, we who long We live in a country where the Republicans do not go to the hospital. Because the Republican is a hospital.
 [9, p. 23] Arpi Voskanyan's series "Revolution" created during the days of the revolution has an obvious documentary emphasis, which was published in parallel in the cultural supplement of "Hraparak" newspaper, and the same author has been regularly published on the Internet and press since 2012. Who is he? ”is a series of political riddles, which is one of the primitive realizations of the national folklore typical of pop art: He is very delicate and very educated, Learned outside, He sits rudely with the oxen.
 He was a spokesman for the president, he beat the journalist like a boss.
 But he has been in opposition for a long time, he is standing in line, his wife is the editor of a famous newspaper.
 Grandparents were writers And the father-in-law was a writer, Modest but one, Silent coordinator.
 56 The envoy was with the people Fat and lucky, But all hopes were dim and vague.
 And the regime is still in a panic, the ruling pyramid has been emptied.
 Marine Petrosyan's "poetic" texts, which are written almost every day, have the same tendency of documentaryness. Today, when I write these lines, May 17, 2019, the court session on Kocharyan's pretrial detention continues. I do not want to watch it. I look at the second president of Armenia as if he were a dinosaur, it is sad.
 It should be noted that Armen Shekoyan started writing texts full of documentary, anti-elitism and folklore elements in the modern Armenian literature in the book "Antipoetry" (2000), in the poem "Yerevan Hotel" (2000-2001), as well as in the novel "Haykakan Zhamanak".
 Gegham Saryan knew me a little, Hamo Sahyan knew me very well, Gorik himself knew me a little, Dki Norik knew me very well, Sos knows me, Khorik knows me, Serozh knows me, Borik knows me, Lipo and Jumarbaz Jan know me, Nansen knew me and Demirchyan, who hoped like us in these places. He knew something, but he did not tell me.
 [12, p. 284] Thus, literature, becoming an instrument in the hands of the ruling society, can acquire populist accents, can also participate in the formation and spread of populist ideology, and the literature itself can be populist.
  At the same time, literature is both a phenomenon that reflects and validates reality, and a system that predicts and models future developments.
 .
