Liberalization of international civil aviation, like "globalization of the economy, are global trends", therefore, there is no alternative.
  However, in the case of Armenia, it is conditioned not only by internal capacities (taking into account the level of development of national air carriers), but also by the external regional situation, taking into account national security issues.
  Moreover, it is obvious that the development of aviation will have a significant impact on the recovery of any state, including Armenia, and the preservation of political independence.
  Undoubtedly, taking into account the geographical location of Armenia, the land environment, the air traffic plays a decisive role in the development of the country, as in the light of the current conditions, air transport is the only safe and reliable means of international transportation.
 At the beginning of the 20th century, when the first airplanes appeared, there was a great deal of discussion about the rights of states, both to their airspace and to other airspace.
 The commercial nature of air communications required the liberalization of interstate cooperation, which manifested itself in the emergence of "freedom of air" commercial law1.
 Before World War I, France was a leader in aircraft production.
  For a long time, France did not consider it necessary to recognize certain restrictions on air travel, the recognition of the sovereignty of states over their airspace.
  The French side considered that the "freedom of air" regime could not hinder the freedom of air transportation2.
  This position of France was facilitated by the fact that it had colonies.
  Having colonies in Africa, the Middle East, and other parts of the world, France was not interested in establishing sovereignty over the airspace of those colonies.
  The theory of "freedom of air" did not pose a threat to the French colonies.
 Founding the theory of "freedom of air", the famous French scientist P. Fossil argued that "freedom of air" is determined in a natural-legal context.
  Air is not subject to man by its physical nature, in fact man cannot influence him, and from a legal point of view the force of law could extend only to heights.
  In 1904, when P. Fossil founded the theory of "freedom of air", at that time the tallest building in the world was the Eiffel Tower, which was 330 meters high.
  Focusing on its height, the scientist came to the conclusion that the airspace above the Eiffel Tower is not subject to anyone, it is free for air transportation.
  All this by scientist P. Fossili concluded that it was impossible to subjugate the airspace to anyone's authority, and that it was therefore legally correct to enshrine the theory of "freedom of the air."
  At the same time, the scientist believed that states have the right to impose certain restrictions on the use of airspace.
  For example, to ban foreign planes from flying over their territory, to take measures for their national security, to protect their commercial rights from the competition of other countries.
  Establishment of the theory of "freedom of air" in the international aviation legislation, which was created in 1911. by the International Aviation Legal Committee, became the Franco-German Agreement.
 After the end of the First World War in 1919. The Paris Peace Conference adopted the Convention on Air Transport, and the Member States unequivocally recognized the exclusive և full sovereignty of the State over its airspace.
  Orienting to the most important question - who controls the airspace, in 1919. The member states of the Paris Convention did not seek to make it accessible to non-member states.
 Thus, according to 1919 Under Article 5 of the Paris Convention, Member States were authorized to operate flights within the airspace of the Member States4.
  Non-member states did not have this right.
  Thus, the model of air communication liberalization was already envisaged in 1919. During the Paris Peace Conference, within the framework of cooperation between the member states of the Convention.
 1919 The Paris Convention also regulated the use of international airspace.
  After establishing their sovereignty, the states began to deal extensively with the liberalization of air communications.
  This was evidenced by the 1919 The provisions of the Paris Convention, by which states give their consent to the right of free flight of aircraft in peacetime, only with the prior permission of the aircraft.
  Special permits were issued for military, customs and police aircraft5.
 Already in 1920-1939 the regulation of aviation was classified as a public right of the state.
  In a broad sense, this term should mean the regulation of international flights և air communications.
 Despite the fact that the states had sovereignty over their state airspace, international air communications were regulated by domestic norms and international treaties, there was a need to establish a common special regulation6.
 Before the Second World War, in 1944 An international conference on civil aviation concluded in Chicago on December 7 with the participation of 52 states7.
 The idea of ​​holding the conference belonged to the USA.
  At the end of World War II, the US Air Force was concerned about the post-war fate of its aircraft factories.
  These factories produced a large number of civil aircraft in peacetime.
  In order to settle their economic problems after the war, the American civil aviation equipment manufacturers took measures so that the American organizations could carry out unimpeded transportation all over the world.
  Due to all that, American carriers would be able to occupy a leading position in the field of international air transportation.
 The Soviet Union did not participate in the Chicago Conference, although the Soviet government was invited to attend.
  The reason for not participating in the Soviet Union for a long time was unknown.
  As it turned out years later, it was related to the fact that the Soviet Union was against Portugal's participation in the Chicago International Conference.
  And this circumstance was conditioned by the fact that Portugal had fought as an ally of Nazi Germany8.
 Realizing the advantage of its situation, the United States began to defend "freedom of air".
  The apparent desire of the United States to secure the leading position of American organizations in the world caused great dissatisfaction in England, Germany, Canada, New Zealand and Australia.
  This circumstance played a great role in the solution of the further issues of the International Civil Aviation Conference.
 The Chicago Convention և և մեծ մեծ և օդ և և և և և ագ ագ ագ իկ իկ ագ ագ ագ ագ ագ ագ ագ ագ ագ ագ ագ ագ ագ իկ իկ ագ իկ իկ իկ իկ ագ ագ ագ ագ ագ ագ ագ ագ ագ New normative documents are developed on the basis of it.
 ICAO Goals և Problems are listed in the 1944 Chicago Convention. Article 44 of the Convention: • Ensure the safe and proper development of international civil aviation around the world • Encourage the operation of aircraft for peaceful purposes • Encourage the development of civil aviation, airports, aviation facilities • Meet the safe, regular, efficient և economic air transport • economic losses resulting from unfair competition; • to ensure respect for the rights of Member States; և to enable each State to use aircraft;
 Bilateral agreements are also of great importance for the regulation of international communications.
  The number of agreements regulating international communications reaches about three thousand.
  The role of these agreements is really huge, as they regulate interstate communications հարաբեր relations between states in this area.
 By participating in international air communications, states open their sovereign airspace not only for international flights but also for international air transport of passengers and cargo.
  It is international transportation that makes international flights economically profitable11.
 The goals of liberalization in the field of state regulation of international communications are: • compliance with international requirements in air communications • provision of aircraft access to the state market • right of transportation • air carrier tariff • regulation of cargo transportation • aircraft leasing և leasing.
 1944 The Chicago Convention compares international non-scheduled flights (Article 5) with "regular international air services".
  According to Article 5 of the Convention, all aircraft that do not operate regular international services have the right to make non-profit transit flights, to land for non-profit purposes without the need for prior authorization, provided that the countries over which they operate are entitled to has to demand a landing.
  In addition, for the sake of flight safety, States have the right to require aircraft intending to fly to areas which are considered inaccessible or do not contain the necessary means of aviation, to follow established routes or to obtain special permits for such flights.
  At the same time, Article 5 states that non-scheduled commercial flights enjoy certain advantages: receiving an aircraft or escorting passengers, unloading cargo and mail, provided that each State of loading or unloading has the right to establish such rights; conditions or restrictions which he deems appropriate.
 The provisions of the Chicago Convention on the sovereignty of the Chicago Convention, seafaring, airports, aircraft registration, nationality, customs and immigration processes are of fundamental importance in the regulation of regular, irregular communications.
  Compliance with these provisions is the basis for the regulation of air communications12.
 General norms on non-scheduled flights are also contained in Article 5 of the Chicago Convention.
  It stipulates the right of non-scheduled flights to land for non-commercial purposes without prior permission13.
 Chicago-type agreements gave obvious advantages to powerful airlines, which is why most foreign carriers refused to use the Chicago-type agreements.
 The new US approach was related to the interests of its airlines, which conditioned the signing of Bermuda-type agreements.
 1946 Bermuda agreements were signed between Great Britain and the United States.
  In the post-war years, the agreement between the United States and Great Britain, which was signed in 1946 during the Bermuda negotiations, played a major role in bilateral air communications agreements.
  The need to resolve conflicts կախված conflicts depending on the carrier's liability, air transport documentation, dispute resolution in air transport, the establishment of common laws that would create uniformity in the application of norms, related to airfare, baggage և cargo, claims for life, compensation for health, directions presentation 14.
  	Some of the rules of international air transportation were aimed at unifying in 1929. Warsaw Convention, 1955, supplementing the Convention. The Hague Protocol, Guatemala 1971 Protocol, Montreal 1975 the protocols.
 1950 և In the following years, in the practice of international air communications, spheres of activity were created, where the intervention of states was inadmissible.
  In particular, liberalization was manifested in areas such as fuel supply, flight readiness, aircraft cleaning, aircraft services, the use of universal codes, and so on.
  The issues arising from these relations are settled on the basis of agreements governing the use, information, technical, commercial and other matters arising between the air carriers and not the States15.
 The customary agreements provide for extensive state intervention in establishing the timetable for transportation between the respective airlines, the frequency of flights, the type of aircraft used, the distribution of revenue, the use of conditional routes, and so on.
  By allowing air carriers to enter into various agreements with each other, states have established appropriate boundaries for them, including in the context of non-state cooperation16.
  That is why corporate agreements between air carriers regulate only non-state private bilateral relations, which arise during the regular use of non-regular international air flights.
 Following the signing of the Bermuda Agreements, the United States announced a policy of regulation aimed at liberalizing charter traffic, free access to markets, tariff flexibility (free prices for charter flights, waiver of regular flight tariffs), and effective competition between competitors.
 Subsequently, the United States and several other Western countries (Belgium and the Netherlands) entered into liberal air agreements, which have been described as a broader entry into the market, a reduction in state control over carrier tariff policies.
  Some agreements include liberal provisions on issues such as charter flights, net cargo transportation, and automated system protection.
 At the 5th World Air Transport Conference, ICAO presented to the States a standard bilateral air communications agreement, which includes elements of the "open skies" regime, customary approaches to air traffic regulation.
  It includes provisions such as entry into the air carrier market, assignment of air companies, setting tariffs, volume of carriage, avoidance of possible collisions during competition, application of established laws, protection of the carrier market from unfair competition, use of joint codes17.
 After the Second World War, the regulation of international air communications was carried out under the strict control of the states.
  But in the 70-80s of the 20th century. This control was gradually liberated, replaced by a policy of "anti-regulation", and after that the "open skies" regime was established.
 The idea of ​​counter-regulation belonged to the United States, the essence of which was to reduce the role of states to interference in the regulation of international air communications and commercial rights.
  As a result, foreign carriers gained the right to have routes to US cities where they previously had no access18.
 90s The United States initiated the "open skies" regime by concluding agreements with individual regions of different countries, allowing carriers to operate in some markets without restrictions, which would open access to the rich US transportation market.
  "Open Skies" agreements put designated carriers in an advantageous position with carriers from the same region of the country who did not enter into agreements with the United States and were subject to strictly customary air traffic arrangements, forcing them to enter into negotiations with other US carriers. with the aim of establishing a reciprocal regime 19.
 The Open Skies Agreement with the United States was signed by Luxembourg, Norway, Sweden, Finland, France, Germany and a number of other European countries.
  Following in the footsteps of Europe, Latin America, the Asia-Pacific region, and in part the Middle East, have signed intergovernmental agreements with the United States.
 The impact of liberalization was evident in the litigation of disputes related to air transportation.
  In order to reduce the risk associated with the rights of airline companies, a system of judicial jurisdiction has been established, which allows resolving complex disputes between the "passengers" of air carriers.
  The guide can independently choose one of the 4 courts.
  At the option of the plaintiff, the claim may be lodged with: • the court of the carrier's location • the court of the country in which the carrier is headquartered • the court of the country where the carrier entered into the air transport contract
 The 1970 Montreal Convention retained these four options for filing a lawsuit, adding five to cause damage to the passenger, resulting in bodily injury or death.
  Pursuant to Article 33 2 2 of the Convention, in addition to the above courts, a claim may be brought before a court of the State in which the applicant is at the time of temporary or permanent residence 21.
 An important direction in ensuring the safety and liberalization of international aviation is the fight against illegal interference in the activities of civil aviation.
  1963 are aimed at that. Tokyo, 1970 The Montreal Conventions.
  The latter defined the universal jurisdiction of states over illegal interference. Each state is obliged to either punish the criminals or to extradite them to another state for that purpose.
  In particular, the Lockerbie precedent of the UN International Court of Justice was the basis for the extradition or prosecution of the perpetrator of the Aut Dedere Aut Judicare principle22.
 Various interstate bodies have been set up at regional levels to ensure the uniformity of aviation safety standards.
 The first multilateral agreement on non-scheduled air communications was signed in 1956. between the participants of the Civil Aviation Conference in Europe (EKGA), and the next one was signed in 1971. among the countries of Southeast Asia (ASEAN).
  These agreements provide for a liberalization regime, which is provided to the parties to the agreement when conducting irregular air communications23.
 United Aviation Authority (JAA) - A cooperation body of the aviation authorities of European countries.
  It was established in 1900 in Cyprus.
  The main goal of the JAA is to ensure the uniformity of aviation safety standards throughout Europe, as well as to increase the efficiency of aviation production in European countries.
 The European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC) was founded in 1955.
  It has 42 European countries as members.
  The main goal of the ECAC is to ensure the sustainable development of air transport in European countries.
  The Republic of Armenia has been a member of the ECAC since 1996.
 Interstate Aviation Committee (MAK).
  The UN was founded in 1991 by the 12 states of the former USSR with the signing of the "Agreement on the Use of Airspace and Civil Aviation".
  The UN is the civil aviation executive body of the member states24.
 International Air Transport Association (IATA).
  IATA was founded in 1945. In Cuba.
  The main goal is to ensure the international cooperation of the airlines, to provide the provided services safely, comfortably, with maximum economic benefit to the consumers.
  Currently, IATA has 189 member countries.
 Eurocontrol (EUROCONTROL) - The European Organization for the Aviation Safety, Eurocontrol, is a pan-European body whose main purpose is to establish a European air traffic control system.
  In order to carry out its tasks, Eurocontrol develops European aeronautical requirements, detailed procedures for the implementation of international standards, and technical guidelines on the basis of international standards of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).
  The organization implements a comprehensive European program of aeronautical technical development, air traffic control processes, flight safety measures, and coordination of its implementation in the member states.
  Armenia has been a member of Eurocontrol since 2006.
 Zvartnots Airport is currently the largest airport in Armenia, one of the largest in the region in terms of air traffic.
  However, the most important of the 5 airports within a radius of 1,200 km from Zvartnots Airport is Istanbul Airport, whose turnover in 2012 It was 4.5 million, the 20th largest in the world.
  The second largest airport is Imam Khomeini International Airport in Tehran. served 4.9 million passengers, or has the capacity to serve 6.5 million passengers.
  Tbilisi airport is inferior to Zvartnots in terms of turnover in 2012. Only 1.2 million, but it should be taken into account that in addition to Tbilisi airport, there are 4 other active airports in Georgia: in Batumi, Kutaisi, Poti and Sukhumi.
  Baku Heydar Ali Airport in 2012 served more than 2.3 million passengers.
 It is not satisfactory that Zvartnots lags far behind these airports in terms of the annual growth rate of inbound traffic.
  The situation in the sphere changed dramatically due to the fact that "Armavia" was leaving the market, this became an occasion for the issue of regulating the aviation market to enter the agenda of the executive with a new dimension.
  After studying the proposed options to liberalize the air communication sector, 24.10.2013 At the regular sitting of the Government of the Republic of Armenia, it was announced about the liberalization of the sphere of air transportation in Armenia, in other words, the adoption of an "open skies" policy25.
  The analysis shows that the "open skies" policy will have the greatest positive impact on the economy, job creation, growth of the number of passengers and reduction of air transportation tariffs.
  According to the best experts in the world in this field, Armenia should follow the path of liberalization, which will stimulate the growth of the gross domestic product, will create new jobs, will make the transportation convenient, will the prices decrease.
 In general, the adoption of the "open skies" policy implies the removal of the following restrictions by the government. • Limits on the number of airlines • Limits on frequencies, schedules, capabilities կարող services offered by the airline • Requirements to coordinate operations to airlines • Pricing restrictions.
 However, at the same time, it is necessary not to ignore the negative consequences of the operation of the market model.
  In particular, the obstacles to the market system of air transportation are: .
 From this point of view, it is very important to clarify the organizational and legal justification of the status of a national carrier.
 In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that the following measures are inevitable in the course of radical reforms in the sphere: 1. Expansion of international agreements on air communication. 2. Ensuring transparency in the pricing of tariffs for the services provided by "Zvartnots" airport. 3. Implementation of a special program on the bankruptcy of "Armavia" airline. The state will acquire the controlling stake in the company for the purpose of recovery, and then, according to the schedule, after implementing a recovery program for a maximum of three years, will withdraw from the project by selling its share.
 4. Given the low standard of living of the majority of the population, taking advantage of the experience of international liberalization, put forward the idea of ​​the need for a more modest, low-cost airport where special airlines can operate low-cost flights.
  A striking example of this is the Kutaisi airport in Georgia, the Ghulyan airport in Ki, from where the Polish-Hungarian budget airline Wizzair operates economically.
 We think that Gyumri "Shirak" airport can serve as such in Armenia.
 .
