There are certain reasons behind each separatist movement, which are the basis for some groups to start separatist movements.
  Examining these issues, we can find out why certain groups want to secede from the state.
  Each separatist movement has its own reasons and contributing factors, so we will try to study the most common of them.
 K. Sanstein singled out several reasons for separatism, such as restrictions on civil rights or civil liberties, economic exploitation, historical processes, cultural integration, etc. [6, pp. 654-655].
  We will try to study the mentioned reasons as well, as they are considered to be the main reasons for the 333 POLITICS in separatist movements, although these reasons may be accompanied by other very contributing factors.
 One of the reasons for separatism is the restriction of civil rights or civil liberties.
 The sub-union can be separated from the state itself, as the citizens are subjected to pressure by the state, the freedom of the citizens is restricted.
  A vivid example is the period of the Soviet Union, where the right to free speech and freedom of citizens were widely restricted, which were factors contributing to the secession of the state.
  Government pressure can restrict the right of a part of the population to free speech, which will lead to discrimination against that group.
  If the pressures are widespread on that group, then the separatist manifestation can be considered as an appropriate reaction.
  The separatist movements in that case try to prevent the pressures and improve their previous status.
  Political pressure alone cannot be a sufficient basis for secession, but the right of secession must be exercised to the fullest, for even if the subunit cannot secede, it may gain certain privileges.
 The constitutional right to secede from the state can be exercised when civil rights and freedoms of citizens are restricted.
  This argument is based on T. According to Jefferson, "If a state in a union declares that it prefers to secede, I will say without hesitation that they secede" [6, p. 657].
  Restrictions on civil rights and freedoms gave rise to separatist movements in Eastern Europe.
 A more serious reason for separatism is economic exploitation, as in this case the sub-union loses certain revenues that are given to the central government.
  Economic exploitation is gradually eroding the resources of the 334 POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS, reducing their incomes.
  In this step, the revenues are used for general purposes.
  Such a policy of the central authorities can be a contributing factor to secession.
 The main reason for the collapse of Yugoslavia was this fact, where the economically rich Slovenia and Croatia feared that in the future their funds could be allocated to other states that are part of Yugoslavia.
  At present, the case of Catalonia can be considered a vivid example of economic exploitation, where Spain uses its income and allocates a small share for the needs of the population of Catalonia.
  Perhaps this can be considered the main reason for the Catalan separatist manifestation.
 K. Sunstein argues that economic exploitation can indeed play a significant role in segregation, but on the other hand, it is not possible to calculate revenues and expenditures more accurately, as subunits are economically interconnected [6, p. 661].
  Assuming that in some cases subunits are subject to economic exploitation, then the only solution to this problem can not be considered secession, but the solution of these problems can be clearly defined by changing certain provisions.
 One of the factors contributing to separatism is the idea of ​​"historical injustice", that is, a state that was previously independent and sovereign, became part of another state through war, which forces it to correct the historical mistake through secession.
  This idea later became the impetus for the start of separatist movements in the Baltic states, which were forcibly annexed to the USSR, after the collapse of which not only those countries became independent, but also the states that were also forcibly annexed to the USSR.
  Based on this argument, states have a moral right to secede.
 One of the reasons for separatism is also cultural integration, where, K. According to Sunstein, 335 POLITICS The subunit in the state perceives itself as the bearer of significantly different norms and customs [6, p. 664].
 This fact can be considered a contributing factor to separatism, as was the case in Czechoslovakia, in particular Slovakia, which had a warmer attitude towards the Catholic Church and was considered a more agriculturally developed country than the Czech Republic.
  Of course, cultural homogeneity may require great risks, but communication between different groups can lead to other norms and, most importantly, can be a serious impetus for the establishment of democratic order.
  It cannot be said that in case of secession their move will be justified, as in the future there may be problems that the given subunit or group will not be able to solve alone.
  Sometimes the calls for secession are made on emotional grounds, which are often provoked by certain groups.
  Cultural integration, compared to other reasons, is a weaker reason for secession, but in this case it would be preferable not to allow the tension to increase through negotiation.
 Some theorists also single out the lack of trust in the central government as a reason for separatism, when the government pursues a policy that could lead to a crisis situation [5].
  In this case, the sub-union stands out and begins to solve the problems it faces on its own.
  Lack of confidence in the central government is often manifested in countries with a federal or federal system of government, but the presence of this factor is considered very weak, so it often does not lead to secession.
 Examining the causes of the separatist manifestations and the contributing factors, it can be stated that, although each separatist movement is based on certain causes, they can also have many other related factors.
 336 POLITICAL SCIENCE In this subchapter we have tried to include the most common causes, which are now very common not only in European separatists, but also around the world.
  However, European states try to calm nationalist sentiments through legislative or constitutional changes, the main purpose of which is to preserve the territorial integrity of their country.
 For more than fifty years of EU history, integration has been considered the main guarantee of peace.
  Its main goal is the prevention of new wars, as well as the exercise of the right to self-determination in accordance with the norms of international law.
  The cornerstone of the EU institutional system was laid by the "founding father" of European integration J. By Monet.
  That stone became the principle that was later officially voiced by French Foreign Minister R. By Schuman in 1950 May 9 declaration. "The most important condition for a successful movement towards a united Europe is the formation of a legal basis for a system of integration and common institutions, which are partly interstate and partly supranational" [1, p. 58].
  That is, the system will be endowed with the right to make binding decisions and to monitor their implementation.
 After the Cold War, the European integration process took place in several stages, and the partition of Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia and the collapse of the USSR gave rise to new integration processes in Europe, as new sovereign states emerged in Eastern Europe.
  If in the past Eastern Europe was considered a zone of influence of the USSR, then after the collapse of the USSR the interest in this region increased and the EU began to include these countries under European influence.
  Recent events show that in the struggle for Eastern Europe, the parties are taking very strict action.
  A striking example is the case of Ukraine, where part of the Ukrainian people tried to join the European Union, but in response, separatist movements began in eastern Ukraine, followed by the secession of Crimea, which is de facto in Russia. But de jure its independence was not recognized by other countries, even the countries close to Russia - Kazakhstan, Armenia, Belarus - did not recognize the secession of Crimea.
 European countries have always opposed unilateral separatism, as the emergence of new states can cause problems for the European community, but when the issue is discussed in the interests of that state, the state can change its opinion on separatism and the creation of new states.
  The legitimacy of this fact can be proved by the example of Russia, when it spoke in favor of the free self-determination of the Crimean people, but, on the other hand, that state does not recognize the example of the free self-determination of the people of Artsakh.
  The same can be stated in the case of the EU, that this structure recognizes the independence of Kosovo, but, on the other hand, ignores the sovereignty of Artsakh.
  This proves the fact that every state or international organization views secession only in its own interests and not out of respect for the right of the people living in any region to self-determination.
 F. Letamendia believes that the EU is trying to resolve the issue of national self-determination in terms of conflict resolution, but its main goal is to prevent tensions and prevent them from escalating into wars [4, p. 5].
  This policy has always been on the agenda of European countries, but European countries do not have control and preventive measures to prevent these manifestations from escalating into armed conflict and disrupting Europe's security and stability.
 338 POLITICS A striking example of European separatism is the precedent of Kosovo, which today began the process of state-building to be considered a full-fledged European state, as its independence has already been recognized by more than 100 countries.
  However, in the former Yugoslavia, in addition to the Kosovo issue, there are many other territorial disputes, including the northern part of Kosovo - Pristina, Vojvodina in northern Serbia, Istria in Croatia, Rijeka and others.
  In the context of integration processes, the EU intends to sign an Association and Stabilization Agreement with Kosovo, said EU Commissioner for Enlargement and Neighborhood Policy in Pristina Y. Han [2].
 F. Latamendi believes that the EU policy in this direction is built on the logic of "Europeanization", that is, it is a process that involves the resolution of conflicts through European structures [4, p. 6].
  This means integrating into European structures, which will try to ensure a peaceful settlement of the disputes caused by the secession.
 However, as experience shows, these structures do not do any serious work, as they do not have binding mechanisms for conflict resolution.
  Some theorists mainly use 3 ways of governing the self-determination of the EU states and the conflicts that have arisen in them: 1. Preservation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the state, 2. Settlement of conflicts through negotiations and reaching agreements, 3. Acceptance of secession ].
 In each of the territorial divisions and the resulting conflict, the EU uses one of these three methods, taking into account the main threats to European security.
 339 POLITICS The role of the EU in separatism can be discussed with the following question: How to calm down the nationalists?
  Some believe that their activities endanger the self-government of European politics, while others believe that each nation, liberated from another domination, has the opportunity to form a "new Europe" [3, pp. 76-77].
  However, the idea of ​​creating a "new Europe" is not so widespread, as many separatist movements in Europe today are not encouraged by the European community.
 .
