Compensation has traditionally been seen as a means of protecting a violated subjective right, by which it is restored.
  This measure of protection of the right is applicable in the case when it is not possible to actually restore the situation that existed before the violation of the right, only compensation can be provided for the negative consequences.
 According to Article 13 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the ECHR), everyone whose rights and freedoms under this Convention are violated has the right to an effective remedy before a public authority, even if the perpetrator persons.
  [1] In the case of Silver v. The United Kingdom, the European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the ECHR) ruled that having a remedy at national level (otherwise the Convention law enshrined in Article 13 of the ECHR) includes both the claim and the Restoration of the violated right in any way, if necessary.
  [2, paragraph 113] In developing this position in the case of Aksoy v. Turkey, the ECtHR noted that Article 13 of the ECHR requires a domestic remedy that would allow the competent national authority to hear both the complaint under the Convention and the Convention. to satisfy it accordingly.
  Recognizing that the method of redressing the violated rights depends on the nature of each violation committed and that states should be given some freedom in their choice, the ECtHR found in the same case that in any case the remedy provided must be both factual and effective. in legal terms.
  [3, para. 95] In the case of Keenan v. The United Kingdom, the ECtHR held that compensation for damage caused by a breach of Convention rights should in principle be available as a possible remedy.
  It has been held that Article 13 of the ECHR requires compensation for a violation of another Convention.
  [4, paragraphs 123, 130-133] In the case of Poghosyan v. Armenia, the ECtHR stated that “the applicant should have had the right to apply for compensation for non-pecuniary damage caused to him as a result of ill-treatment.
  As Armenian law does not provide for such compensation, the applicant was deprived of an effective remedy.
  Consequently, there has been a violation of Article 13.
 [5, Section 2, paragraphs 44-48] If it follows from Article 13 of the Convention that national law should provide for the possibility of reparation, it implies that at national level a person should be entitled to claim damages.
  Thus, Article 13 of the Convention 195 Jurisprudence obliges the State to provide compensation to a person in the event of a breach of a Convention if there is damage.
 It follows from the ECtHR's position in the case of Kudlan v. Poland that the material remedies to be granted may be considered effective if they can prevent, terminate or provide adequate redress for the offense already committed.
 [6, paragraphs 157-158] In case of impossibility to prevent what has already happened, adequate compensation for losses, deprivations, ie damage caused by the violation of the fundamental right is the effective means necessary to restore the violated subjective right.
 The possibility of having an effective remedy is not limited to providing a proper way to restore the right, the person must be endowed before the competent body with real procedural guarantees to achieve the restoration of his right.
 In the case of Iovchev v. Bulgaria, the ECtHR found that Article 13 of the Convention had been violated, although national law provided for compensation for damage caused by ill-treatment (Article 3 of the ECHR) as a remedy.
  At the domestic level, the appellant was not actually able to obtain compensation for the damage caused to him for procedural reasons (a disproportionate burden was placed on the person to prove the fact of damage as a result of the violation), which the ECHR considered "undully formalistic".
  There has been a violation of Article 13 of the ECHR, as although reparation was established by national law as a possible remedy, the person was in fact unable to do so because the procedure was ineffective.
  [7, paragraphs 144-148] In the case of Jonka v. Belgium, referring to Article 13 of the ECHR, the ECtHR reiterated that the remedy must be effective both from the point of view of law and 196 JURISDICTION in practice.
  The Court notes that the effectiveness of a remedy within the meaning of Article 13 of the ECHR does not require that the desired outcome be guaranteed to the applicant.
 Nor should the "state body" mentioned in the article necessarily be a court, but if it is not, then its competence and the guarantees provided are relevant circumstances in assessing the existence of an effective remedy before that body.
 [8, paragraph 75] Thus, Article 13 of the ECHR allows the aggrieved party, on the one hand, to seek effective redress from a High Contracting Party which has violated his Convention, and on the other hand, this right presupposes the existence of a competent national body authorized to provide effective protection. and to whom the person must have sufficient procedural safeguards to obtain appropriate redress.
  Restoration of the right is carried out, among others, in the form of compensation for damage, and therefore Article 13 of the ECHR reserves the right to apply for compensation and recognizes the existence of such a legal possibility for the person.
  In all cases where a person ultimately fails to receive fair compensation for the damage caused to him at the domestic level, Article 13 of the ECHR is violated.
 Only in two separate articles is the right to compensation specifically defined.
  These are Article 5 5 5, which provides for the right to compensation in the event of unlawful deprivation of liberty (in violation of Article 5 1- 1- 1-4), and Article 7 of Protocol No. 7, which provides for the right to compensation. for illegal conviction.
 [2] Leaving aside the narrow features of these articles, the presentation of which is beyond the scope of this article, let us emphasize that the mentioned provisions are only special manifestations of the general rule of Article 13 of the ECHR (lex specialis).
 In the case of Wasink v. The Netherlands, the ECtHR found that Article 5։ 5 of the ECHR was considered protected, 197 JURISDICTION if it is possible to apply for compensation when a person has been deprived of his liberty for a violation of paragraphs 1-4 of the same article.
  By the same decision, the court stated that the issue of compensation could not be raised if the violation of Article 5 1-4 1-4 of the ECHR did not result in material or non-material damage that should be compensated.
  [9, paragraphs 36-38] Thus, the compensation provided for in Article 5 5 5 of the ECHR is again aimed at compensating for the damage caused.
 The court's interpretation of this provision may apply to the general rule. Compensation for a violation of a convention right is not provided for the violation of a person's right itself, but for the purpose of compensating for the damage caused as a result.
 The issue of the existence of such damage must become a separate subject of discussion each time.
 In the case of Brogan v. The United Kingdom, the ECtHR found that, in the period preceding or immediately after the fact that the other provisions of Article 5 of the ECHR had been established, national law did not provide for a claim for damages before the domestic courts. refers to the domestic courts ", and on that basis found a violation of Article 5 5 5 of the ECHR.
  [10, points 66-67] In the case of Teymurazyan v. Armenia, the ECtHR noted that the lack of possibility of compensation for non-pecuniary damage under Article 5 of the ECHR under Armenian law deprives a person of the right to receive compensation on both substantive and legal grounds. recorded a violation of Article 5 5 5 of the ECHR.
  [11,, 77, 77-79] Thus, Article 5 Մ 5 of the ECHR requires a person to be entitled, at the domestic level, to receive compensation for damage caused by a violation of other provisions of the same article, to apply to a court with such a claim. Finally, use some means of legal protection.
 In the above-mentioned case of Poghosyan v. Armenia, the ECHR has already registered a violation of Article 13 on the grounds that the RA legislation does not provide for the possibility of compensating non-pecuniary damage resulting from a violation of Article 3 of the ECHR.
 Thus, in both cases, the provisions of the Convention provide for the restoration of the violated right, requiring the state to restore it.
  If there is a special convention norm, the latter applies, and if there is no separate convention provision for compensation for a violation of a convention (for example, in the case of Articles 2,3), then Article 13 applies, which presupposes, inter alia, damages. possibility of compensation.
  Theoretical sources also take the approach that Article 5 մասը 5 of the Convention and Article 7 of Protocol No. 7 are considered to be specific manifestations of Article 13.
  [12 p. 240] In line with the international obligations assumed by the Republic of Armenia, Article 62 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia recognizes the right of persons to be compensated by state or local self-government bodies through unlawful actions or inaction, and in cases defined by law, also through lawful administration.
 The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia, by its decision No. SDO-1383 of November 7, 2017, noted that “the enshrinement of each right already implies not only the protection of that right and the definition of liability in case of its violations, but also compensation for damages caused as a result of its violation.
  Only in that case the system of protection of rights and freedoms will be complete and effective.
 [14, point 5] It follows from the above that compensation for damage is one of the necessary elements in the formation of a full and effective protection of rights and freedoms, and that the fixation of any subjective right presupposes compensation for damage caused by its violation.
 The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia, referring to the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia on compensation for damage, as amended by the decision SDO-929 dated 27.11.2005, noted: "As for the content of the phrase" in accordance with the law "stipulated in Article 16, Part 4 and Article 20, Part 5 of the RA Constitution, the Constitutional Court finds that the Constitution, referring to the law, at the same time proposes to compensate the victim. a requirement to establish an order that should guarantee an effective mechanism for the effective exercise of the right in question.
 [15, point 7] In the current edition, Article 62 of the RA Constitution also states that the procedure and conditions for compensation of damage must be defined by law.
 This means that the state must guarantee the protection of the subjective right in the form of compensation for damage, and therefore the right to compensation for damage in the constitutional sense presupposes the provision of an effective judicial and extrajudicial mechanism for its realization.
 The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia, referring to the right of access to the court by the decision No. SDO-1257, mentioned as one of its primary elements the legal possibility to file a lawsuit, demand compensation and receive the court decision.
  [16, paragraph 9] In the case of Jacobson v. Sweden, the ECtHR found that resolving the issue of the lawfulness of a ban on the construction of a land owned by a person violated the exclusive jurisdiction of the executive under Article 6 1 1 of the Convention, as the was deprived of the opportunity to challenge such decisions in court.
  In the same case, the ECtHR further noted that the requirements of Article 13 of the Convention are more than 200 JURISDICTIONS soft and therefore absorbed in Article 6 of the Convention and in that case need not be considered separately.
  [17, paragraph 78] It follows that Article 6 of the Convention absorbs the provisions of Article 13 of the Convention in terms of the availability of an effective remedy by the Court.
 In all cases when the court does not have the authority to determine compensation for the damage caused to the person (material and non-material), the right to compensation for damage is violated.
  In its turn, such a legislative gap, not allowing the exercise of the constitutional right to compensation for damage, creates an unconstitutional situation.
 When the court has the power to provide protection in the form of damages, but the access of the court to the horse is restricted disproportionately or without a legitimate aim, the constitutional right to damages is violated again.
 Thus, it turns out that the content of the constitutional right to compensation for damage has two manifestations. The first manifestation is the fact that a person has the right to request a court or other independent body to provide him / her with the necessary means of protection of the rights in the form of compensation for the damage caused.
  (availability of claim for damages).
 The second manifestation is the fact that the violated person acquires the right to receive compensation to the Republic of Armenia or the community.
 If the violation of the right is established, the right to receive compensation cannot be restricted, as it will undermine the essence of the right to compensation.
  Access to protection from the state in the form of compensation for damage, which is a component of the constitutional right to compensation for damage, may already be somewhat limited, and the further wording of this article is devoted to the discussion of this issue.
 201 JURISDICTION In the case of Linder v. Sweden, the ECtHR stated that when a person has an arguable claim to be a victim of a violation of his or her rights under the Convention, he or she must be granted a domestic remedy in order to have his or her claim recovered. The necessary means of protection of the right will be provided.
  [18, paragraph 77] In the case of Boyle and Rice v. The United Kingdom, the ECtHR stated that it did not follow from Article 13 that the State should in any case provide appropriate remedies to persons without regard to the merits of the complaint.
  The submitted complaint must have an appropriate degree of substantiation, ie it must be an arguable claim.
  By the same decision, the court refused to give the abstract criteria for the appeal of the appeal and insisted that in each special case a separate assessment should be given to that circumstance.
 [19, 52 52 52, 55] Only if the ECtHR finds that an individual complaint submitted to it after all domestic remedies have been exhausted can it be considered an arguable claim, will Article 13 be applicable and subject to substantive consideration? will make the issue of providing an effective means of protection to a person at the domestic level an issue.
  If a complaint to the European Court of Human Rights alleging a breach of a fundamental right does not meet the above-mentioned criterion of admissibility, the ECtHR will, without examining the substance of the case, find that a person's right to a domestic remedy has not been violated.
 Returning to the constitutional right to compensation for damage directly and based on the above, it should be noted that a violation of the constitutional right to compensation for damage caused to persons allegedly injured as a result of public activity can be registered not only when the violation is actually established, but also no compensation is provided. When a person's complaint was substantiated at the domestic level but he was not able to assert his claim, he was not provided with all the means reasonably necessary to obtain compensation for the alleged damage at the domestic level.
 As a justification for this, let us present the position of the EBRD in the case of Babbins v. The United Kingdom.
 The background of this case showed that deadly force was used by the police, and the sister of the deceased had filed a complaint with the European Court of Human Rights.
  An investigation was held at the national level, as a result of which the actions of the police were considered lawful.
  In this case, the European Court did not find that there had been a violation of Article 2 of the Convention, but the Court found that the applicant's complaint was an arguable claim and therefore referred to the observance of Article 13 of the Convention.
  The court found a violation of Article 13 of the Convention on the ground that the domestic law did not provide for such provisions as to give a sister the right to claim compensation for non-pecuniary damage (pain, suffering) suffered as a result of her brother's death.
  [20, paragraphs 170,177] Thus, even if in the end it turned out that the public authority had acted lawfully, the lack of sufficient conditions to achieve compensation for damages speaks of a violation of the fundamental right to compensation.
 In the case of Powell and Rainer v. The United Kingdom, the ECtHR linked the term "arguable claim" to the term "manifestly ill-founded" in Article 35 3 3 of the Convention.
  The Court reasoned that if, at the admissibility stage, the complaint was found to be so unfounded that at the international level the complainant was denied substantive consideration (the case was not upheld), then the State party should not be obliged to comply with such claims at the national level. to ensure the availability of appropriate remedies.
  [21, point 33] In the general sense, the term "obviously unfounded" can be understood as "obviously baseless" or "without justification".
  In that case, the European Court should hear all the complaints that raise a real legal issue (particularly when there is a violation of the law and the legality of the restriction should be examined) even when it is generally clear that there is no violation of the Convention .
  [22, p.896] It can be said that all the cases that we seem to conclude when they are examined need further discussion do not seem to be regarded as "obviously unfounded".
  Another idea that interprets the term may be that the appellant's complaint reveals the possibility of a violation of his / her subjective right.
 Despite the above, there are many cases in the practice of the European Court when the complaint is recognized as "obviously unfounded" after its deep, comprehensive and long-term study, ie when at first sight it was not clear that it was unfounded.
  This circumstance is in many cases conditioned by the overload of the court.
 Notwithstanding the above, if the court concludes at the admissibility stage of the appeal that the complaint concerning the violation of the Convention in question is manifestly ill-founded and therefore does not need further consideration, the issue of having appropriate remedies for such an appeal is no longer considered and the state recognized. without prejudice to Article 13 of the Convention.
 In order to avoid possible abuse, we consider that at the domestic level, states are obliged to provide protection at a first glance with all the requirements that need to be addressed, which may also relate to compensation.
 There are also some legal regulations in the legislation of the Republic of Armenia on the "obviously unfounded" claim.
 It follows from Article 3 of the RA Code of Administrative Procedure that anyone who considers that his / her rights have been violated or may be directly violated by an administrative act, action or inaction of a state or local self-government body or its official, may apply to an administrative court. .
 According to Article 80, Part 1, Clause 4 of the RA Code of Administrative Procedure, the administrative court rejects the acceptance of the lawsuit if the person who has obviously no right to it has filed a lawsuit.
  [23] It follows from a systematic analysis of these two norms that even when a person finds that his or her right has been violated or may be directly violated, the latter cannot sue unless, in the court's assessment, he or she clearly does not have the right to do so.
  The legislator uses the term "obviously not having the right to file a lawsuit."
 It is known that a lawsuit is a substantive and procedural concept, the substantive side of which is expressed in the legal claim presented by the plaintiff to the defendant, and the litigant is the claim addressed to the court to examine and resolve the dispute between the parties, and the lawsuit is an external form of expression.
 This means that a person should be considered "not entitled to file a lawsuit" both when there is no right to a relevant substantive claim and when such a right does not belong to him and the latter has no legal interest.
 In particular, it turns out that if the general examination of both the lawsuit itself and the documents attached to it makes it clear to the court that there are administrative disputes over the legal acts, actions or inaction of the body and the damages caused by them are unfounded or the claimant is not entitled to such a claim. The latter may not consider the claim and may not provide the person with remedies which should objectively have been sufficient to obtain redress.
 The RA Constitutional Court by its decision No. SDO-1022 referred to the above-mentioned issues and recorded the following: "By stipulating the word 'obviously' in the disputed provision of the Code, the legislator aims to check not the existence of a violation of the substantive right at the admissibility stage of the lawsuit, but the fact that the allegedly violated right belongs to that person, ie the plaintiff is an 'interested person'."
 [24, item 7] The RA Court of Cassation expressed a similar position by the decision made on December 26, 2014 in the administrative case No. VD / 3477/05/13.
 It follows from the above-mentioned decision of the Constitutional Court that the term "obviously not having the right to file a lawsuit" refers only to the apparent lack of legal interest in filing a lawsuit with a person.
  In other words, it is clear from the outset that the claim does not relate to the plaintiff's rights and responsibilities.
  At the same time, even if it is obvious at first sight that the person's claim is materially unfounded, the latter must be provided with all the means of protection that can generally lead to the restoration of the allegedly violated right of the person.
 In our estimation, the RA Constitutional and Cassation Courts gave a narrow interpretation to Article 80, Part 1, Clause 5 of the RA Administrative Procedure Code, without referring to the fact that the plaintiff is a material claim against the defendant through the court.
  We consider that from the literal interpretation of the norm defined by Article 80, Part 1, Clause 5 of the RA Administrative Procedure, it follows that the court may reject the lawsuit and restrict the right of access of the person to the court even in the case of the lawsuit and the attachment. It is clear from the study that the claim is unfounded from the point of view of substantive law.
  This obviousness is first of all expressed in the fact that the act of the administrative body has been annulled or such a claim has been submitted to the court with a claim for damages.
 We meet another manifestation of the problem in Part 9 of Article 1087.2 of the RA Civil Code.
  [25] According to this provision, a person may file a claim for non-pecuniary damage by a public authority in court only if, at the same time, the main claim of the legal acts, actions or inaction of the public authorities has been submitted, or they have already been were recognized as illegal.
 There is a presumption of legitimacy of the activity of public power and until it is denied by a state act having legal force, the claim for damages will be obviously unfounded in the substantive sense, it will be obvious from the beginning that there is no real possibility to satisfy such a claim.
  The court will consider a separate claim for damages if the act of the relevant body has been recognized as illegal beforehand. otherwise, a separate claim for damages will be rejected.
 Based on the above, we consider that in order to avoid possible abuse at the domestic level, states are obliged to provide a means of protection with all claims that need to be further examined at first sight (obviously not considered unfounded in material and procedural terms), which may also apply to compensation.
 Only in the present situation will the restriction of the right of the state to have a remedy for an obviously unfounded claim be considered lawful, and no violation of the basic right to compensation will be registered.
  In all other 207 JURISDICTIONS, the lack of a right to compensation under national law, as well as the lack of an effective procedure before a court or other competent body, will lead to a violation of the right to compensation.
 .
