As it is known, the main goal of studying a foreign language within the framework of communication approach is not only the mastery of the relevant language expressions, but also the implementation of functions conducive to communication.
 Language is first and foremost for communication.
  Thus, mastering purely vocabulary and language patterns is not ineffective if the learner is unable to communicate in writing or orally.
  Of course, the teaching of grammatical systems is not neglected at all in the formation of interactive communication skills, because the better we know the language, the better we understand it and express it fluently.
  Fortunately, today the process of teaching a foreign language is based on the principle of developing effective communication skills.
  In linguistic terminology, a foreign language course should generally consist of not only linguistic but also communicative awareness.
  As D. Himes notes: “The child uses linguistic skills in communication without paying particular attention to their structures and patterns.
  He simply acquires communication skills and uses his linguistic skills properly in communication. ”
  [1, p.277].
 The four main components of communication skills are linguistic, multilingual, verbal and strategic.
  These four components must be taken into account when teaching a foreign language.
  These components are especially effective when acquiring cultural knowledge of the language being studied.
  The role of the culture of the studied language is a cornerstone in the development of communication skills.
  Therefore, it is important to pay attention and pay close attention to it.
 Language Culture Components of Communicative Awareness Development Materials Teaching Methods Necessary Elements for Forming and Developing Communicative Awareness in Foreign Language Teaching 314 LINGUISTICS It is also about the pedagogical methodological, cultural knowledge and skills of the pedagogue.
  He must be able to choose appropriate technologies, master the technical skills and cultural features to apply them correctly according to the verbal and non-verbal situation.
 By prioritizing the use of interactive methods to increase communication awareness, the language specialist must be well aware that in order to engage in interactive activities, it is necessary to initiate a number of relevant tasks, be it in pairs, team, debate, role play or original videos.
  Real interactive activity presupposes a student-centered template.
  The pedagogue must be able to watch from the side, be tolerant of mistakes.
  Interpretation is more effective in this case than direct correction of mistakes, as it interrupts the conversation.
 While engaging in interactive intercultural activities, students participate in the discussion of problematic situations, where they have to overcome cultural and practical difficulties.
  In the context of the above, the issue of using authentic sources is important.
  It is no secret that interactive activity presupposes an emotional and impulsive process, taking into account that an atmosphere of mutual respect and mutual trust should be created in the classroom, where students are involved in discussions and are initiators.
 The use of modern pedagogical technologies is determined by the criteria of the lecturer's communication awareness.
 Considering the activity of a pedagogue who teaches foreign languages, it should be noted that he should be able to test, assess the student's knowledge, perform psychological, diagnostic and experimental work.
  In order to organize the methodological work correctly, it is necessary to clearly choose and develop the methodology, create a favorable and effective atmosphere in the classroom, formulate information, apply general didactic principles in specific situations, use stimulus tricks, re-evaluate educational information, and supervise the educational process.
 Thus, the modern standards required of a language teacher are language proficiency, high level of knowledge, application of innovative technologies, special acting data.
 Strategies for the development of communication awareness are different in their type and nature.
  They enrich the student's cultural background knowledge, expand his creative, impromptu speech skills.
 Showing original videos to classes is also classified in the list of communication and especially verbal awareness development strategies.
  The process of word formation should be based on the audiovisual method, taking into account the principle of didactic examination.
 Watching educational and feature films especially contributes to the development of oral speech.
  Videos are valued for the fact that the audio and video media allow for a large-scale assessment of communication awareness at the same time, by not directly participating in the process.
  If the whole vocabulary of the film is not clear to the student, then the content of the film becomes available through gestures and facial expressions.
 It can be argued that the use of video films in teaching foreign languages ​​has a positive effect.
  Feature films quickly change the educational atmosphere of the audience.
  As MN Vlasenko notes, "Given the scope of students' interests and motivations for learning, films can create an atmosphere of creative interactivity in the classroom."
  c.126].
 316 LINGUISTICS Multi-genre (fiction, documentary, animation, sports, information, talk shows, plays, quizzes, etc.) during the teaching of foreign languages ​​mainly have a relaxing effect on the student, which is like a break from a certain exercise.
 It is no less important to shoot videos in classrooms.
  As it is known, educational and non-educational films are widely used in the English teaching process, but very few educators show the videos with appropriate effective methods.
  They do not do pre-film, post-film exercises.
  In this case, it is important how much work has been done with the material to be presented.
  Students should be aware of the importance of video media in teaching foreign languages ​​and should take responsibility for such activities.
 Students can design the lesson taking into account the wide range of technological possibilities.
  They can use the camera during the lesson to act as a film director, screenwriter, journalist, newspaper reporter.
  Thus, students can shoot small episodes on the camera in different situations, which will be followed by active discussions in English.
  The attractiveness of this activity is that there is a creative cooperation, which becomes an incentive to improve the student's language skills and communication skills.
 The topics of educational films can be chosen according to the language of instruction.
  Relevant educational films can be shown in the classroom in parallel with the information taken from the newspaper, magazine coverage and discussions.
  Such work stems from the student's interests and promotes interactive verbal activity.
 "Creating your own films can become the basis of language projects.
  All students participate in similar 317 LINGUISTICS projects, sharing responsibilities as evenly as possible.
  With the right choice of methodology, techniques and tricks, you can achieve great results in communication, not forgetting the huge role of the pedagogue.
  First- and second-year students watch movies in English, mostly with subtitles.
  Pre-film and post-film exercises are suggested.
  Discussions of different episodes of the film and their reproduction are of fundamental importance.
  The exercises created around writing new scripts and presenting them are no less important.
 Watching the film gives Armenian students an opportunity to compare different cultural features, to distinguish similarities and differences.
  The choice of the film should be made by mutual consent of the teacher-student.
  The film is shown in several stages with corresponding pre-film, film and post-film exercises.
  If the film is somewhat familiar, active discussions about its content begin before the screening, and if it is unfamiliar, the discussion can start with the title, the famous actors playing in the film.
  The tasks performed during this period prepare the student for watching the film, based on his background knowledge, stimulating interest in the topic, reducing the fear of unfamiliar words.
  One striking example of this is introducing students to a situation that they have to predict the development of, for example, students are told that they will see a scene where several tourists buy a ticket at the airport to spend the weekend in a seaside town.
  They should write five words under each of the headings "sights" (places they expect to see) and "words" (words that may be found in the episode).
 318 LINGUISTICS It is desirable to watch the film in 3-5 minute sections, paying attention to the facts, the development of the content, the peculiarities of body language, the use of language.
  The pedagogue suggests the students to watch the episode and find answers to such questions as: where are these people, why are they here, what is their relationship, what is happening?
  After looking more closely, students are required to focus on some details.
  With the help of post-film assignments, students should be able to respond to the content of different episodes after watching the film.
  The range of post-film tasks is wide: they can be discussions, role-plays, writing activities on the given topic.
 Thus, the cultural peculiarities of the given language and their mastery for correct communication play an important role in the formation and promotion of communication skills.
  Videos are a good way to study, recognize and apply the cultural components of the language being studied.
  The priorities of shooting video films and their content are also important.
 .
