The consistent answer to the question "What is the right?" Requires research in two relatively independent directions: logical and epistemological.
  Within each of these directions or methods, law is studied in a certain aspect, certain scientific problems are solved.
  The logical and epistemological understandings of law, as the results of the corresponding methods of research, not only do not contradict and make superfluous to each other, but, on the contrary, condition and complement each other.
  If the result of logical research is the definition of the notion of law, which allows the law as a possible behavior aimed at the realization of the objective vital interests of social individuals and groups, as a type of social behavior to distinguish it from unrighteous types of social behavior, a 62 JURISDICTION no longer defines.
  The absolutization of one of these methods of research at the expense of the neglect of the other leads to a one-sided, limited, and therefore inadequate understanding of the so-called social phenomenon.
 It is known that the main logical function of understanding is the mental separation of a relevant subject or class of subjects from others with certain features.
  The normative concept of law clearly performs its logical function.
  "... Law (objective right) from the point of view of normative legal perception, is a system of binding norms expressing the universal and individual interests of the country's population, defined and sanctioned by public authorities, secured by state coercion, regulating public relations, which is characterized by formal certainty." 11.
 The definitions given "from the point of view of normative legal perception" generally have and are doomed to have one common "flaw".
  This inevitable "defect" is manifested in the fact that here the concept of law is defined by the identity of law and the law, while law and law are not only the same as fixed in the normative legal understanding, but also different.
  But if we mean that the limit of normative understanding of law is predetermined by the limitations of logical research of law, if we mean that logical research of law can not be demanded more than what is called, and finally, if we mean that the normative concept of law is full If it performs its logical function, then we can assert that its operational advantage is given in the logically insurmountable "disadvantage" of the normative legal understanding, that is, in the circumvention of the difference between law and law.
  In a word, the normative concept of law has a clearly expressed logical substantiation.
 63 JURISDICTION More.
  Opposite to the so-called legal understanding of law, in other words, legal understanding 6, pp. 20-23], where the explicit (natural-legal version of legal understanding) or "shamefully" (liberal-legal version of legal understanding) is presented as The normative legal understanding, which is independent of the law, precedes the law, is beyond the "time and space", normative legal understanding is based on the fact that cognition is given directly, not the right which does not exist in itself, but the positive right "now and here". that is, the law in a broad sense, and the law in general is an abstraction from the law and exists only in the current law and through the law.
  In this sense, law and law are in the same relationship.
 Thus, the normative notion of law, the understanding of law as a system of binding rules defined and sanctioned by the state, has both logical and ontological substantiation.
 In the literature, the normative understanding of law is inadmissibly attributed to the "logistical" type of legal understanding and thus already puts a sign of equality between positivist and normative legal understandings "6, p. 2023.
  "The logistical type of legal understanding," says V. A. Nersesyants, - the identification of the law (as a certain objective essence, independent of the will and arbitrariness of the official government) and the law (as a compulsory-compulsory commandment of the government) is descriptive ” 4, p. 30].
  Limited to the logical study of law, the logistical-positivist understanding of law absolves the identity of law and law, the principle "every law is a right" and rejects the possibility of a cognitive study of the distinction between law and law.
  Meanwhile, the normative understanding of law differs from the positivist-logistical understanding of law in that the identity of law and law is not excluded, simply, the issue of differentiation of law and law has no logical solution.
  On the other hand, logic itself does not allow to exclude the equality of law and law. If a right exists only in law, then it does not follow that every law expresses a right.
 By equating the normative legal understanding with the positivist understanding of law and "fitting" it into the logistical type of legal understanding, the authors, in fact, at least in this case, turn the type of legal understanding into a "procrastinating bed".
  This proves that the methodological significance of the typology of legal understandings, however, should not be overestimated.
  The diversity of definitions of law, definitions of the concept of law in all its richness can hardly be classified into two or three types of legal understandings 8], without serious losses.
 The normative understanding of law does not deny, but presupposes an epistemological study of law.
  The point is to differentiate between law and law. To be more precise, the issue of distinguishing between right and wrong in law can be solved only through epistemological research of law, the main function of which is to reveal the essence of law, which is inaccessible to logical research, to find a criterion that distinguishes between law and law. Logical and epistemological are not only methods but also degrees of research.
  If the normative definition of law fulfills its logical function, however, it is incomplete, then the epistemological understanding of law comes to overcome that shortcoming and not in an "empty" place, but based on the normative definition of law, the results of logical research of law.
 The question of the distinction between law and law does not lead to their polarization, to the denial of the identity of right and law, which is typical of the legal understanding of law.
  By the way, if there is a hypothesis of legal jurisprudence or type 65 JURISDICTION, which excludes the difference between law and law and thus turns into a contradiction of a logistical understanding that excludes the equality of law and law, then the liberal-legal version tries to overcome the limitations of one or the other.
  "In the liberal-legal theory of legal understanding, says the author of the same theory V. A. Nersesyants, - while interpreting the issues of legal essence and legal phenomenon, the distinction and relation between law and law, the opposite extremes and shortcomings inherent in usurpuralism and legitimacy have been overcome ”4, p. 35].
  It is difficult to agree with the author.
  In fact, the extremes of usurialism (natural-legal versions of legal understanding) and legitimacy can not be considered overcome as long as law is understood as an objective essence independent of law (formal equality) and law as a phenomenon of that essence.
 Such a divergence of law as an objective essence independent of the will of the legislator and of the law as a phenomenon expressing the will of the legislator, and even their "reconciliation" in the form of legal law  4, p.
  Both naturalism and liberal-legal understanding eventually turn the question of the differentiation of the law into a question of the search for the prehistoric objective objective essence of the law, independent of the law.
 Since the same right can be manifested by different laws, since the law is a creation of the state and it can express not only a right but also an arbitrariness, it follows that the issue of the distinction between law and law exists objectively.
  The logistical legal understanding in principle rejects this issue, absoluteizing the equality of law and law.
  Legal understanding tries to solve the same issue by absolutizing the difference between law and law, by opposing law as essence (or content) of law as a phenomenon (or form).
 66 JURISDICTION In fact, the issue of the distinction between law and law can be solved within the framework of epistemological research of law, based on the results of normative legal understanding, ie logical research of law, according to which any right exists through law, ie any right is a state order (law and law are the same). ), but it is not any law or order of the state that expresses the law (law and law are different).
 The law and the law are both the same and different.
  The law and the law are the same as the only way of existence of the law is the current law, and the law is not preceded by the law, but by the individual (private) and general interests of the specific society at the stage of development as subjects of coexistence.
  Moreover, the common interests, not summing up the mechanical sum of the individual and private interests of individuals and their separate groups, are presented as a result of their "reconciliation, mutual agreement, socialization, which is realized through the purposeful behavior of public relations participants (including public authorities).
  Naturally, the concrete reality contains different opportunities for the realization of concrete interests.
 The opportunities that are recognized by the state, that is, pass through the prism of the state will and are recognized in no other way, if not in the form of law, become a right from them.
  Real law, thus, contrary to the legal understanding, is as much a "creation" of the state as the current law itself.
 The difference between law and law is the difference between necessity and arbitrariness manifested through law. ”
 The law, in fact, is necessary in the law, and what is necessary is what corresponds to the objective requirements of the society for the development of a specific historical coexistence of people united by common interests and in various relations, and due to which it acts as a state regulator of public relations.
 .
