Legal culture is an inseparable part of the general culture of the people, which is based on its principles, reflects its level of development, way of thinking.
  Legal culture is not formed separately from political, moral, aesthetic cultures. They share the common goal of creating a moral and legal status of society, which ensures the freedom of behavior of individuals and responsibility to society, protects their rights, social security, dignity.
 In other words, the individual finds himself at the center of economic, social, political, cultural processes.
 Legal culture, having many types and forms of manifestation, also has its antipode, legal nihilism.
  Legal nihilism (lat. Nihil - nothing) is the denial of law as a social institution, rules of conduct and all similar systems that contribute to the proper regulation of human relations1.
  It should be noted that legal nihilism presupposes state nihilism at the same time, as the exclusion of law, in fact, includes the exclusion of the state as a legal organization of public power.
  The nature of legal nihilism lies in the denial of laws, which, of course, leads to illegal activities, hindering the development of the legal system.
  In fact, legal nihilism presupposes a lack of legal culture.
 Legal nihilism can be active or passive, see Zryachkin A.N. Legal nigilism.
  Reasons and ways of overcoming them. Autoref. 383 JURISDICTION is related to ignorance of the law, or philosophical, which is related to the structure of the human worldview, in which the social role of the law is denied.
  At the same time, legal nihilism can be seen by those who are actively associated with the law as a nominal institution, but in fact pursue their own interests through corruption and hierarchical structures.
  2 Legal nihilism is a kind of distortion of legal consciousness.
 As mentioned, legal nihilism is expressed in a person with a negative attitude towards the right.
  However, such an attitude towards the law can be of different degrees, active and passive.
  The passive form is expressed in the disbelief in the law, in the denial of its positive role in the society.
  The active form is characterized by hostility to the law, propaganda of such views among other citizens (anarchism).
 Legal nihilism, in general, is the lack of faith in law, order, laws, negative and disrespectful attitude towards laws3.
  The reasons for legal nihilism are different.
  Describing post-Soviet Russia, for example, Professor V. Tumanov notes that when the country renounced totalitarian methods of government and tried to adopt the rule of law, when people had a real opportunity to enjoy rights and freedoms, then the low level of legal awareness and legal culture was immediately observed. , as well as indifference to the law and its underestimation4.
  It is noteworthy that this phenomenon was typical not only of post-Soviet Russia, but also of other post-Soviet countries, with minor differences.
 See in the same place.
 See Donchenko R. Right nigilism as established social's influence, See Tumanov V. Legal nigilism in the historical-ideological perspective. 384 JURISDICTION The situation in the Republic of Armenia was no different, as our society was also accustomed to the policy pursued by the authorities, and, of course, it was quite difficult for the latter to assimilate the new legal system, new rights and freedoms, the skills to use which are not yet fully formed. in.
  As Professor I. Ilyin mentions. "A law-abiding person can be law-abiding only by his own conviction and decision.
  Without it, there is no legal awareness and justice.
  And in that case people become not a reliance for the rule of law, but an obstacle.
  In this case, we must distinguish between law and order and law-abiding, because in the first case people obey the law, and in the second case they respect the law.
  In other words, law-abiding is the voluntary position of the individual, not the forced position, therefore, in this case the individual follows the law not because he is afraid of it, but because he respects it ”5.
 Another reason for legal nihilism is that in certain circumstances the ideas of law and order can be used by interested leaders and government agencies as an excuse to use force and violate human rights.
  This can be called legal conformism, when the ideas of law and legality are adapted to the situation when they are used not for the benefit, but to the detriment of public interests and demands6.
 This is due to the fact that often peaceful demonstrations, marches and rallies of citizens, as well as various civic initiatives are subjected to violent treatment by the government, which is presented as a protection of public interest and constitutional order, See Ильин И. А. Assembly of compositions.
  в 10 т. T. 2. Kn. 1. "Our tasks".
  Articles 385 JURISDICTION while citizens enjoy their constitutional rights and freedoms.
  From this point of view, Handley's opinion is noteworthy, according to which the state can be the reason for legal nihilism.
  The commentators raise the question why the citizens should follow the law, when the state does not follow the same law7.
  Lack of faith in the law forms the basis of legal nihilism, which contributes to the legal-political counter-culture.
  The general disregard for the law is a consequence of the extremely low level of legal awareness and the lack of an adequate legal culture8.
  A serious source of legal-political nihilism is the violation of human rights, especially rights such as life, dignity, property and security.
  Weak legal protection of a person leads to a decrease in faith in the law, weakening the capacity of the state to ensure order and stability in society.
  Improper use of the law can not form a positive attitude towards the latter, on the contrary, it gives rise to dissatisfaction and complaint9.
 Often the subjects of legal nihilism (citizens, officials, state bodies, non-governmental organizations) simply do not comply with the requirements of legal norms, but seek to act and live "according to their own rules."
  This phenomenon can be explained for various reasons, but the most important of them is the fact that often in practice legal norms may not fully express the interests, rights and freedoms of their addressees.
  And the impossibility of exercising one's own right gives birth to a feeling of alienation, legal disappointment, skepticism, forming legal nihilism.
  The citizen stops evaluating and See ibid., P. 154.
 See Donchenko R. Right nigilism as established social's influence, See ibid.
 386 JURISDICTION to respect the law, because it does not see in it its trusted guarantor.
 Legal nihilism is also combined with the notion of justice, which means a general moral meaning of the structure of society, a set of limited principles of social structure, high legitimacy of social and political institutions.
  American professors J. Madison, A. Hamilton and J. Jay sees justice as the goal of governance.
  In their opinion, justice is the goal of civil society.
  And the latter has always strived and will continue to strive for that goal 10.
 Of course, real political life confirms this thesis. No long-term goals and plans can be implemented by unfair means and methods11.
  If there is no justice, legal nihilism arises.
  We think that the existence of legal nihilism in the Armenian society contains many dangers both for the society and the state.
  Legal nihilists form a legal mentality that constantly takes them to the streets.
  Not believing in the justice of the laws, not connecting the protection of their rights with state and political institutions, the society will always be in an unstable state.
  This can lead to two consequences. The government, in its turn, referring to its legal obligation and right to maintain order in the state, will try to put pressure on the citizens.
 In this regard, it is appropriate to quote the words of Professor Walzer: "You will not escape from power and coercion anywhere" 12.
  And See Foley M., Edwards B. Paradox of civil society. JournalofDemocracy, 1996, 387 JURISDICTION Voluntary unions and civil society will, in turn, sharply criticize the government, resulting in a "dissident" civil society.
  Both of these consequences in the Republic of Armenia are directly conditioned by the behavior of the political power, which in practice rejects the means of real dialogue with the civil society, pushing the society to the streets.
 As a result, a model of society-state relations can be created, which will be based on a destructive conflict.
  In order to solve these problems, the right must be brought closer to the people, so that the mass legal consciousness is strengthened, so that the people understand and evaluate the laws and voluntarily follow their obligations and exercise their powers fairly.
  And the only way to solve this problem, in our opinion, is the establishment of a state governed by the rule of law, a state in which law will prevail.
 .
