Acknowledging that parliamentary diplomacy is a reality and not just a subject of scientific debate on possible developments in the field of diplomacy, politicians and researchers state that it operates in mystery. In fact, diplomacy remains the function of the executive power, at the same time it is a field from which the parliament is not completely excluded.
  This is a mystery, as the diplomat is "in service" in the government, while the parliamentarian is free to express himself and is not constrained by executive responsibilities1.
 As a result, what is the position of parliamentary diplomacy over the traditional one, what features and additional advantages does it have, and how can the parliament justify its intervention in a sphere, which has traditionally been considered the exclusive privilege of the executive power?
  This diplomatic tension between the executive and the parliament has been and continues to be the main leitmotif of many debates related to parliamentary diplomacy.
 "I must admit that when I was the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Malta, I looked at parliamentary diplomacy differently than it presents itself to me today, when I am the Speaker of the Maltese Parliament.
  When I was Foreign Minister, parliamentary diplomacy initially seemed to me to be an exclusive field of diplomacy within the 445 POLITICS, which is reserved for the state and the national diplomatic corps headed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs.
  It was, of course, a simple idea and not correct. "Later I realized that he who is generally perceived as a competitor, can also become a powerful ally." The statement was made by the Speaker of the House of Representatives of the Maltese Parliament M. in a forum on "Diplomacy and Intercultural Dialogue" held in Dubrovnik (Croatia) in May 2010. Friend 2.
  Referring to the peculiarities and advantages of the parliamentary diplomacy, the speaker noted. "Parliamentarians can act farther from the public eye than the members of the executive.
  They can more easily "break the ice", prepare and pave the way.
 ... While traditional diplomacy is the head of state kingdom, parliamentary means across borders are particularly important in keeping that head cool and calming the passions of diplomatic debates. ”3
  According to M. Frendo's parliamentary diplomacy is very effective in all bilateral issues, in which parliamentarians and diplomats have the same diplomatic message, and where parliamentarians can become an important source of behind-the-scenes diplomacy in the best possible way4.
 Spanish politician P. Garcia-Escudero Marquez mentions the following features of parliamentary diplomacy. Մեթոդ The methods used by parliamentarians are less formal, which facilitates the resolution of some foreign policy issues, ibid.
 In the same place.
 446 POLITICS  Parliamentary delegations, as a rule, consist of representatives of different political groups represented in the parliament - representative pluralism, which enriches foreign cooperation;  has access to issues that are not accessible to the government in its formal relations, and therefore often serves as a first step;  can serve as an instrument of oversight of the executive;  resilience to possible change in government; է adheres to democratic principles and ideas; which is quite understandable, given the parliamentary institutions from which it originates,  and finally,The foreign policy activity of the parliament is characterized by the fact that it takes into account not only the interests of the state, but also the interests of the international community5.
 "One of the important features of parliamentary diplomacy is that it has special political mechanisms and institutions at its disposal, which allow to effectively influence the foreign policy decisions of their governments.
  "Unlike traditional diplomacy, parliamentary diplomacy is freer and is not constrained by various government directives." The Development of Parliamentary Diplomacy in the 21st Century. The role of the senates "was mentioned at the sitting by the chairman of the Council of the Russian Federation Sergey Mironov.
  The most important thing, according to S. According to Mironov, although the parliamentarians do not have credentials, they have a no less weighty mandate - the mandate of the voters, that is, the mandate of the peoples of their states6.
 Referring to the difference between traditional and parliamentary diplomacy, Chairman of the RF State Duma Committee on Foreign Affairs D. Rogozin had mentioned. "The main partners of parliamentary diplomacy are the parliaments, not the presidents and the executive power.
  The parliamentarians, as implementers of foreign policy, in no case duplicate the work of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, but solve certain problems themselves, one can say at the "horizontal" level7.
 "The parliament is a political body. Decisions are made by a majority of factions.
  "Due to the nature of their activities and the responsibilities they owe to the electorate, the deputies must draw the appropriate line in the sittings of the parliamentary committees (including international ones), as this authority has been transferred to them by the groups of the population they represent." Kosovo and V. Toropigin, emphasizing that this is the essential difference from the ideologically neutral executive power, which in its activity does not face the problem of agreeing on different approaches to the same issue (sometimes diametrically opposed).
 This is one of the most important features8.
  "On the other hand 448 POLITICAL SCIENCE, not so close connection with the official position of the state gives an opportunity to maneuver in the negotiations", the authors note and remind that the parliamentarians sat at the negotiating table for the settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict for the first time. Take the first step 9.
 2011 Barbara Prammar, President of the Austrian National Council, also mentioned the great flexibility and open nature of parliamentary diplomacy as part of her report entitled "Opportunities and Advantages of Parliamentary Diplomacy" at the University of New Delhi. "The deputies have no ceremonial restrictions, thus they are not obliged to present the official position of their own country, therefore.
  That is why parliamentary diplomacy is the best possible alternative to establishing direct contact between peoples. ”10
 2012 year. During a roundtable discussion on the role of parliamentary diplomacy in Quebec, Canada, in October 2007, the Indian representative stressed that parliamentarians' diplomatic initiatives should not be viewed in the same way as those carried out under the auspices of state diplomacy. "Although both have their limitations, trust, respect and reciprocity are necessary, in particular, in the conduct of parliamentary diplomacy."
  During the same "round table" 449 POLITICS The Speaker of the National Assembly of Quebec J. Shanyon noted that parliamentarians are endowed with a degree of freedom of speech and a degree of independence, which has brought them closer to understanding issues and resolving issues more directly and flexibly, adding that due to its independent, multi-party nature, parliamentary diplomacy is unique and mandatory. 12.
 Thus, unlike official diplomacy, parliamentary diplomacy is less formal.
  The diplomat is the representative of the executive power, who expresses the positions of the state.
  Members of parliament, however, are politicians who can have political convictions on any issue that coincide or do not coincide with the official position of the state.
 They are freer in international dialogue, they are not constrained by the restrictions conditioned by the diplomatic protocol.
  Such flexibility allows parliamentarians to debate more openly with foreign partners and to come up with innovative solutions to complex international issues.
  Due to these advantages, most politicians and researchers are in favor of parliamentary diplomacy, considering it a valuable addition to classical diplomacy.
 "Parliamentary diplomacy can complement government diplomacy, as members of parliament can be more flexible in their diplomatic activities," said the 2012 report of the Association of Parliamentary Secretaries General. At the regular sitting (Quebec, Canada) the representative of the Netherlands, G. Hamilton, emphasizing that parliamentary diplomacy neither copies nor replaces traditional diplomacy ”13.
 "Parliamentarians are free to make tougher demands in international relations than government officials are able to do." The Speaker of the Swedish Parliament Bjorn von Sjudov stated at the European Conference of Parliament Speakers (Tallinn, Estonia) in May 2006 that "the contribution of parliamentarians is often seen as a welcome addition to the work of government representatives" 14.
 According to Mexican international expert Kh. Munoz Ledo Cabrera's parliamentary diplomacy supports and strengthens traditional diplomatic methods. "Today, it is perhaps the only tool available to the international community that allows states to resolve differences, reconcile through dialogue, discussion and negotiation, and even unite their interests."
 The same opinion is shared by the Guyanese diplomat O. Ishmael: "Parliamentary diplomacy is a particularly useful tool and a perfect complement to traditional diplomacy."
 The Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly, entitled "Promoting Parliamentary Diplomacy", 451 POLITICS (2010) defines parliamentary diplomacy as an "additional tool of traditional diplomacy".
 It should be noted here that in the context of relations with traditional diplomacy, the issue of the independence of parliamentary diplomacy from the official position of the government receives ambiguous comments.
  "If parliamentary diplomacy is another tube of traditional diplomacy, then, in all likelihood, it should not be paid too much attention," writes Greek international expert S. Stavridis and supplement. "And if, on the contrary, it is a new form of diplomacy, which almost de facto includes an element of democratization, then it should deserve more attention."
  According to the author, parliamentary diplomacy should not be the next parliamentary expression of official policy, but should become a real dialogue between parliamentarians17.
  In one of his works, Daniel Fiot, a researcher at the Institute for European Studies at the Open University in Brussels, expressed such an opinion, noting that if parliamentarians are too close and indistinguishable from their own government, it can be considered a weak point of parliamentary diplomacy.
  According to D. The strength of Fiot's parliamentary diplomacy is its independence from government and other institutions18.
  Russian theorists Yu. Kosovo and V. Toropigin thinks that it is possible to speak about parliamentary diplomacy as an independent branch in the foreign policy mechanism of the state, only in the sense of a separate mechanism, organizational structure, and not a separate policy 19.
 452 POLITICS It is important for the international reputation of any country to take common positions when raising the country's foreign policy issues in the international arena, therefore, in order to ensure effective practice, these two branches of diplomacy must work in clear coordination with each other.
  Although it is widely accepted within the government that the wider involvement of the parliament in international relations reduces its traditionally perceived role, the result will be mutually beneficial if the policy is developed jointly and their relations are based on mutual trust20.
  In that case, the foreign policy decisions made will be based on a broader collective opinion, the level of collegiality will increase.
  Especially, as noted by the Speaker of the House of Representatives of the Maltese Parliament M. Friend, if we take into account that many international issues are issues of national solidarity, there is a wide platform for cooperation between parliamentary diplomacy and traditional diplomacy.
  Therefore, "parliamentary diplomacy should not be seen as a necessary nuisance or a competing activity, but as a source and a source for strengthening the effectiveness of national diplomatic efforts."
 .
