Conflict resolution is considered one of the major challenges facing the world community today, and disagreements over political solutions and political activism can be considered a convincing argument in favor of the fact that conflicts are not only diverse and multifaceted, but also affect the interests of many states.
 At the beginning of the 21st century, one of the most difficult issues of concern to the world community, the Arab-Israeli conflict, remains unresolved.
  Emerging in 1947. As an Israeli-Palestinian issue, the conflict escalated into an Arab-Israeli one in the following years, directly or indirectly involving almost all 295 CITIZENS of the Middle East, as well as world superpowers with strategic interests in the region.
  In this regard, the efforts to resolve the conflict remain on the agenda of international diplomacy today and the urgency of the issue under discussion remains one of the global priorities.
 The article aims to present the historical significance of the Camp David Accord in the settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict, as well as the problems that arose during and after the signing of the agreement.
  An attempt is made to show the role of the United States in the process of concluding the agreement.
  Prominent representatives of Armenian, Russian, Western and Arab Oriental schools studied the Arab-Israeli conflict.
 N. addressed the issue in their works. Hovhannisyan, E. Abgaryan, S. Avanesov, A. Topalyan, R. Karapetyan, Sh. Karamanukyan, H. Sargsyan, A. Hovhannisyan.
 1973 After the end of the October war, the factors that spoke in favor of a peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict were clearly visible: 1. The growing strength and power of the Arab countries during the war, 2. The oil embargo announced by the Arab countries provided for both oil production and export. apply a reduction to Western countries that supported Israel in one way or another.
 3. Defeat in Vietnam forced the United States to slide more and more into positions of easing international tensions.
 [3, p. 128] The United States is taking steps to redeploy troops between Israel, Egypt and Syria, according to Kissinger. "It was an opportunity to ensure the protection of the territories occupied by Israel."
  [2, p. 129] The United States was increasingly seeking to push the USSR out of the Middle East, while Egypt was more inclined to cooperate only with the United States.
  As EM Primakov mentions. "Justifying their course at the Geneva conference, American officials said that at that time there were no conditions and no conditions at all for a comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.
  That is why it was necessary to follow the path of partial solutions.
  The supporters of that path accused the USSR of violating the measures according to the stages. "
  [1, page 82] 1973 An agreement was reached on December 21, 1974. The Israeli-Egyptian agreement on the division of troops was signed on January 11-18, 2011 at the 101st km of the Cairo-Suez highway.
  A similar agreement was signed in Geneva on the separation of Syrian and Israeli troops.
  A part of the Golan Heights, Quneitra, was returned to Syria on the condition that a demilitarized zone be created here and UN armed forces be deployed.
 1975 A new conference was held in Geneva on September 1, 1945, and on September 4, Egypt and Israel signed the Treaty of Sinai.
  It envisioned the withdrawal of Israeli troops and the crossing of the Milta and Gide mountain passes into Egypt.
  Egypt returned 10% of Sinai.
  Israeli warships were allowed to sail freely through the Suez Canal.
  According to the second document, the United States was obliged to achieve the non-compliance of Egypt with the agreement and to prohibit its participation in the processes against Israel.
  [4, p. 194] After the signing of the Sinai Agreement, changes in US Middle East policy were observed.
 "The cards and Secretary of State S. "Vance came to the conclusion that the step-by-step solution has exhausted itself and it is time to look for ways of a comprehensive settlement."
  [2, p. 159] These trends in the US approach were due to the following factors: 1. First it was necessary to maintain close relations with the Arab conservative regimes.
 297 POLITICS 2. Given the bitter experience of the "oil embargo", avoid repeating it.
 3. It was necessary to take into account the fact that the Palestinian issue also needed some progress.
 4. The United States understood that without the participation of the USSR it was impossible to achieve a serious settlement in the Middle East.
 On October 1, a joint Soviet-American statement on the Middle East was issued: to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict with an immediate and comprehensive solution, to withdraw Israeli troops in 1967. to secure the legal rights of the Arab population.
  All stakeholders, including the Palestinian side, were to attend the Geneva conference.
  It seemed that the United States was returning to positions of cooperation with the USSR, but events took place in the Middle East that "buried" the Soviet-American joint statement.
 In Israel in 1977 The "Likhud" bloc, which won the parliamentary elections, led by M. Begin, took a very tough stance on the Palestinian issue.
  1977 In July 2007, Begin met with Carter and received assurances that Carter would no longer speak of the withdrawal of Israeli troops and any "Palestinian homeland."
  Begin refused to freeze the construction of new Jewish settlements in the occupied territories.
  Begin and his Herut party were guided by the idea of ​​creating a "Greater Israel."
  They called Resolution 181 of the UN General Assembly a decision on the partition of Western Palestine.
  Foreign Minister Dayan demanded that the phrase "Palestinian homeland" be removed from circulation and that the KGB representative's participation in the Geneva conference be excluded in any way.
  A joint Israeli-American statement was issued.
  According to Brzezinski, the US President's National Security Adviser, that statement, in turn, infuriated the Arabs.
 298 POLITICS The next factor was the letter of Egyptian President Sadat to Carter. "Where it was said that nothing should hinder direct negotiations between Egypt and Israel."
  And finally, the most important factor that forced the United States to slide into separate positions on the issue in the 1970s. Recently, the US tended to leave the course of easing international tensions in US foreign policy.
  It should have been reflected in the Middle East policy as well.
 The above-mentioned factors contributed to the United States in every way supporting the separate settlement of the Palestinian issue under its "flag" and minimizing the Soviet Union's participation in that process.
  US Secretary of State Vance presented to Egypt his own plans on the Palestinian issue to hold a referendum to determine the final future of the West Bank and Gaza, there was no talk of the withdrawal of the KGB and Israeli troops from the occupied territories.
 During the transition period, a joint Israeli-Jordanian government was to be established on the West Bank.
  Some influential Israeli politicians, I. Alon, Sh. Peres, etc., were in favor of establishing permanent peace on the West Bank by establishing relations with Jordan, but not in the form of their direct annexation.
 The US wanted to show that the separate talks are not its goal, but the goal of Israel and Egypt.
  On November 19, Sadat traveled to Jerusalem to address the Knesset.
  Maintaining the formal side, the United States was still talking about the Geneva conference, but at the same time put forward the theory of "concentric circles" to normalize Israel's relations first with Egypt, then with Jordan and the Palestinians, and finally with Syria.
  1978 During the Begin-Carter meeting in Washington in March 2010, the US President stated that Israel's demands end in "6 points". 1. Israel does not want to leave the West Bank.
  2. The construction of new Jewish settlements in the occupied territories is not stopped.
  3. Israel will not leave Sinai or 4. will not leave UN 299 POLITICS and under the auspices of Egypt.
  5. Israel does not accept that Resolution 242 refers to the West Bank and Gaza.
  6. The Palestinian Arabs will not be given a chance to decide their future.
 1978 Talks between Israel and Egypt began on September 5 in the United States at Camp David and lasted 13 days.
 Begin's goal was to bring the most powerful Arab country out of the united front of the Arab countries through reconciliation.
  Sadat, in turn, hoped to gain access to the Sinai Peninsula and was ready to turn a blind eye to Israel's ambitions in the West Bank and Gaza.
  But Sadat had to hide it all.
  On the one hand, he persuaded Sadat that reconciliation would bring Sinai back, and on the other hand, he persuaded Begin that reconciliation would increase Israel's security.
  The main obstacle during the negotiations was the issue of the West Bank and the future of Gaza.
  On September 13, at the suggestion of Carter, it was decided to remove the phrase "inadmissibility of occupying territories through war" from Resolution 242.
  The text of Resolution 242 was simply attached to the document "Framework for concluding a peace treaty in the Middle East".
  [5] This paved the way for the Second Document, entitled "The Framework for the Reconciliation of Egypt and Israel".
  [5] Letters from the leaders of the three countries were attached to these frameworks as official documents.
  The letter said: "Every paragraph in which the phrase West Coast is used should be interpreted by the Israeli government as" Judah and Samaria. "
  Exploiting the events in Iran, the anti-profit movement also worried Sadat. Within 3 days, Vance reached the point where Sadat refused his request to set a specific date for the elections on the West Bank, but put forward a new demand. "Introduce autonomy first in Gaza."
  The launch of the Iranian playing card yielded its results.
  1979 A peace treaty was signed in Washington on March 26, 1979, between 300 political scientists from Egypt and Israel, which entered into force on December 25, 1979.
  According to the treaty: 1. Peace is established between Israel and Egypt.
 2. Diplomatic relations are established between Israel and Egypt.
 3. Israeli troops withdraw from Sinai.
 4. The sovereignty of Egypt is recognized within the borders "which was the border of the mandate of Egypt and Palestine.
 5. Israeli ships will sail freely in the Suez Canal.
  Gulf of Aqaba is considered a free navigation zone.
 6. The Egyptian government has the right to have one division 50 km east of Suez.
 7. An area of ​​20-40 km west of the Gulf of Aqaba will be under the control of UN forces.
 8. Israeli troops will not leave the West Bank and Gaza, but will be deployed in security zones.
 9. The autonomy of the population should be ensured in those territories, not territorially.
 It should be noted that this last point was mentioned not in the text of the agreement, but in the joint letter of Sadat and Begin to the Cards.
  Of course, the agreement was the great victory of American diplomacy, but not the final solution of the issue.
 Thus, it can be concluded that: 1. The Camp David Accords split the Arab world and Syria, Lebanon, Algeria, Iraq, Yemen and the KGB declared it illegal and severed diplomatic relations with Egypt. April Revolution in Afghanistan and 1979 The Iranian revolution forced the United States to establish itself in the strategically important Sinai Peninsula on the basis of the Camp David Accords. Conduct US-Egyptian Joint Exercises, 301 POLITICAL SCIENCE 3. The Camp David Accords, in addition to the above, enabled the United States to "avoid a comprehensive settlement and maintain tensions in the Middle East, to maintain its influence over its European allies and its dependent Japan."
 .
