The Republic of Armenia is rich in cultural and natural monuments, many of which have merged with each other over the centuries and created unique monuments in their form. for example, dozens of monasteries, churches, bridges, petroglyphs and their natural environment. All this arouses great interest among many tourists.
  Estimating the volume of the tourism resource of the Republic of Armenia is a difficult process, as it is necessary to take into account not only the current standard tourist destinations, but also the destinations that are less or 434 TOURISM are not visited by tourists at all.
  Many tourist destinations, which are rarely or not offered to the tourist, are not inferior to the destinations that are currently very popular due to their architectural uniqueness, attractiveness, historical and cultural attraction.
 The topic is topical, as the study of tourist sites, represented by the Geghama plateau, will contribute to the increase of the tourist attractiveness of the Republic of Armenia.
 The objects registered in the UNESCO World Heritage List are also very attractive for tourists, and the objects that appear in the above-mentioned list become more popular and fascinating for the tourist.
  In this list we can currently see the following objects located in the territory of the Republic of Armenia: Haghpat and Sanahin monastic complexes, Etchmiadzin Cathedral, Zvartnots, Geghard Monastery, Upper Azat plain and other intangible cultural values.
  It should also be noted that the cultural values ​​/ sites included in the UNESCO World Heritage List belong to all peoples of the world, regardless of their location.
 This list includes monuments and memorials of the greatest value to humanity.
  The most important goal of the World Heritage List is to preserve and make known the unique objects, and for that purpose there are special evaluation criteria.
  There are ten of them, six of which are for cultural monuments, and four are for natural ones.
 Although the Republic of Armenia has a unique climate, natural landscapes and natural monuments, none of them is registered in the World Heritage List, and this does not mean that they do not meet the specific assessment criteria.
  It should also be noted that the proposed object must meet at least one criterion [3].
  There are many natural monuments and land 435 TOURISM shafts in the territory of the Republic of Armenia, which meet not only one, but several criteria.
  Among them is the Geghama plateau, which has all the required standards.
  It is only necessary to clearly delineate and create a specially protected area that will cover a large part of the Geghama plateau, including the natural and cultural monuments on it.
 An example of such a natural object in our region is the Eastern Caucasus, which is included in the UNESCO World Heritage List, which, being the western part of the Greater Caucasus Mountains, is very popular among mountaineering tourists.
  Infrastructures have been developed in this region, which provide many services for those who prefer active recreation, such as cable car, horse rental, paragliding, hot air ballooning, helicopter flights, swimming pools, courts and many food service facilities.
 The Geghama plateau, being rich in cultural and natural spectacular objects and complexes, is already a target of many tourists.
  Registration of Geghama plateau in the list of World Natural Monuments will only increase the number of those flows.
 From the other point of view, special infrastructures will be created in this region, which will ensure the safety, cleanliness, accessibility of the monuments, and hiking trails in accordance with international standards will be built.
  In addition to these advantages, other problems related to the settlements of the region will be solved. Due to the increase in tourist flows, the number of accommodation facilities, food establishments, etc. will increase.
 The length of Geghama mountains is 65 km, the width is 35 km, and it is located between Sevan and Ararat depressions.
  The maximum height is Ajdahak peak - 3597 m, which is the third highest peak in the Republic of Armenia.
  The highest peaks are Mets Ajdahak (3598 m), Spita 436 TOURISM Kasar (3555 m), Geghasar (3443 m), Aknasar (3258 m) and Sevkatar (3225 m) etc. [1].
 At the base there are heterogeneous chalk and Paleogene, on the surface there are Pliocene and anthropogenic volcanic rocks.
  It has an asymmetrical structure.
  The eastern slopes gradually merge with the lava plains near Sevan, and the western slopes descend into the Hrazdan valley, forming a foothill, which includes Hatis, Gutanasar, Menakasar and other volcanic cones.
  The average height of the watershed is 2800-3000 m.
 It is a wavy plateau with volcanic cones, such as Ajdahak and Sevkatar, and remnant eruption domes. For example, Spitakasar, Geghasar, Gndasar, etc.
  The southern highlands are divided by river valleys and gorges.
  The southwestern slopes of Geghama plateau are included in "Khosrov Forest" reserve.
  The lava flows spread in 15-20 km waves in the river valleys of Hrazdan, Azat, Argitchi, causing polygonal, columnar separations.
  There are springs on the slopes, of which Qarasunakn, Akunk, Lichk.
  Cranes of some volcanic cones have turned into lakes.
  Traces of anthropogenic glaciation have been preserved in the upper parts of the river valleys in the form of raspberries and trogens.
  The climate is temperate and cold mountainous, in summer it is short, cool, in winter it is cold (240-250 days), the average annual temperature is 6-40 C in the foothills, 2-00 C in the plateaus, 20C at the top, annual precipitation is 500-900. mm, the thickness of the snow cover is 30-100 cm.
  Azat, Vedi, Argitchi, Gavaraget, Bakhtak and other rivers start from the slopes.
  Upward zoning is observed here, which is also of interest. There are mountain steppes up to 2800 m, higher, near-edge and swampy meadows, and in the snow-covered zone, underdeveloped, skeletal soils with climbing plants.
  On the western slopes there are sparse forests of eastern oak and juniper.
  Among the animals there are rabbits, rabbits, wolves, foxes, bears, lizards, snakes.
  Geghama's plateau can be used for destination information about Geghama plateau peaks, http.
 //wikimapia.org/ 437 TOURISM for tourists interested in bird watching, as there are many birds here [4].
 In addition to many conical peaks, the craters on the Geghama Plateau deserve special attention, such as Lake Akna, Lake Vank, the craters of Lake Ajdahak and Tar, Vishapalich, and others.
 Crater lakes are of great interest and increase the tourist attractiveness, and on their way, in addition to the landscapes of the Geghama plateau, tourists will also see cultural monuments, which we will mention below.
 There are dragon stones on the shore of Lake Vank on the Geghama plateau, which are unique cultural monuments.
  These are stone monuments and are considered by many specialists to be the prototype of a khachkar.
  Dragons have a special place in Armenian mythology and are considered pre-created beings.
  They started the living waters and at the same time preserved it.
  Dragons often also blocked the flow of water, closing the source of the spring.
  Mythological dragons were characterized by both positive and negative behavior.
  For example, in one of the Armenian legends, a bull-mountain Taurus poses and kills the dragon-mountain Zagros, from the wounds of which the waters of the Zab River are formed.
  A monumental dragon prototype can probably be found at the site of Gobekli Tepe.
 In addition to man-made cultural monuments, dragon stones, there are also petroglyphs on the Geghama plateau, which are even more interesting.
  Numerous petroglyphs have been preserved, the oldest of which date back to BC. In the 7th millennium.
  The petroglyphs of the Geghama Mountains feature a variety of wildlife species, often depicted in large or small groups.
 There are clearly preserved species from the Quaternary period, which do not exist in the present-day region, often also extinct, as well as animals that currently exist and 438 TOURISM.
  We often see images of humans, goats, snakes, zebras, wild bulls (or cows), lions, hepards, lynxes, leopards, boars, wolves, domesticated and wild horses, foxes and wolves, many different types of dogs, Caucasian deer, and deer. , images of several poorly defined species of rabbits and small animals, various types of reptiles, and finally, duck, goose, stork, swan, parrot.
  Many of these animals are still found in the Geghama Mountains.
 The only meteorite craters in the territory of the Republic of Armenia are located on the Geghama plateau.
  The craters are located at the top of the mountains, mainly in the central part of the cone, and this crater is a small depression on a flat surface.
  Many experts believe that such a hole could have formed if a meteorite had fallen.
  According to the calculations of Karen Tokhatyan, a researcher at the National Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Armenia, such a hole could have arisen from the impact of a body with a mass of 80-300 kg and a speed of 10-20 km / h.
  It is also interesting that the animals bypass this part.
  There is a spectacular image of a meteorite falling on a slab on the plateau of the Vardenis Mountains called Sevasar.
 As a result of the observations, it becomes clear that Geghama plateau is a huge resource of active tourism for the Republic of Armenia.
  Despite the fact that today this hiking trail is already on the list of the most popular offers for inbound tourists, it will be more recognizable and, therefore, more exploited if it is included in the UNESCO World Heritage List.
  Of course, there is no need to include the whole plateau, but only the part where the spectacular natural and cultural monuments are more concentrated.
 As a result of competent management of the tourism resource, there will be chain developments in the spheres of service, economy, ecology, ecology of the region.
 439 TOURISM The designation of a site as a UNESCO World Heritage Site requires a variety of other information.
  In particular, it is very important to have a passport of the object, which must contain the following mandatory information: 1. name and classification, 2. location and exact geographical coordinates, 3. description, measurement and condition, 4. description of the border and protection zone, area, map - plan, 5. data on the owner and land use, 6. features of the protection and use regime, 7. data on the entity carrying out the protection.
 In case of an offer, the creation of such a passport becomes even more difficult, as the Geghama plateau is a complete complex formed as a result of nature and human cultural activity over thousands of years, which can surely be called a natural-historical landscape.
  First, it is necessary to approve this category of specially protected nature area at the state level, which in turn will lead to certain legislative changes.
  These changes will be completely justified, as such ancient sites are scattered throughout Armenia.
 Given the complex nature of the proposed facility, it will be necessary to bring the facility in line with both the natural and cultural standards set out in the Convention in order to obtain the status of a "mixed" facility.
  Thus the Geghama plateau meets not only one but five criteria set out in the Convention. II. The object testifies to the significant influence of human values ​​in a given period or in a certain cultural space.
 III. The object is unique or exclusive to civilizations or cultural customs that still exist or have already disappeared.
 440 TOURISM The object is directly or partially related to events or existing traditions, ideas, beliefs, works of art or literature and has universal significance.
 VII. The object is a natural phenomenon or a space of exclusively natural beauty and aesthetic importance.
 VIII. The object is a vivid example of the most important stages of the country's history, including a symbol of geological processes taking place as a result of traces of the past, relief, a symbol of geomorphological features.
 Thus, we see that the Geghama plateau has a great opportunity to appear in the UNESCO World Cultural Heritage List.
  Taking into account the fact that this region will register economic achievements at a great pace, it is also necessary to control the activity.
  According to the principles of the Convention, the status of the Geghama Plateau as a World Heritage Site will give the area the following important benefits: 1. Additional guarantees for the integrity and preservation of the unique natural complex; Promoting the development of alternative types of nature use (first of all, different directions of ecological tourism), 4. Ensuring the priority of attracting the necessary funds for the preservation of the World Heritage Site (primarily from the World Heritage Fund), 5.Permanent control (monitoring) of the conservation of natural and cultural objects, which are elements of a unique natural complex and other 441 TOURISM.
 As a result of research on the topic, it is clearly emphasized that the Geghama plateau has a huge tourism potential, and that potential is subject to amateur management.
  Through competent and regulated management, this resource will open new horizons for active tourism in the Republic of Armenia, a number of regional problems will be solved, and hiking trails will also serve domestic tourists.
  The Geghama plateau can become an accessible area for natural science, study of a certain period of history and study of ecological problems.
 .
