The modern stage of development of management theory and practice is characterized by the transition from personnel policy to the concept of human resource management.
  The transition to such a concept in industrialized countries already has a certain history, the main provisions of which have been introduced in many organizations in different sectors of the economy.
  Such an approach is now a reality for organizations in countries with economies in transition, where staff management professionals try to find ways to combine a new management concept and established business culture, national traditions and customs.
 The essence of the new concept is that the staff is considered not only as a group of employees, but also as a management object, which requires taking into account the social profile of the employee, professional knowledge and personal characteristics, work motivation, ability to build interpersonal relationships, etc.
  In the modern world, many organizations realize that without a corporate culture, they can not succeed, because corporate culture is not only the image of the company, but also the main tool for business development.
  In that sense, the role of corporate culture in the organization is growing.
  The culture of the company is one of the main pillars, which determines the efficiency of work and the success of the business.
  It is very important for any company to create a corporate culture from the very first day of the company.
 We often hear stories of successful companies, and the key to that success is the corporate culture created and shaped on the right foundations and values, where people love each other, support each other, go to work every day because they love their job.
 Corporate culture refers to the internal environment factors of the organization - lifestyle, way of thinking, action and survival styles.
  It usually distinguishes a particular organization from others.
  It orients all employees to what is important and valuable to the organization, shows what behavior is considered permissible.
 Corporate culture is one of the concepts of management, about which there is no common definition yet.
  Each researcher in this field gives his / her own unique definition of corporate culture.
 Corporate culture is most often viewed as a system of values, beliefs, rules, and norms that are accepted by the employees of the organization (see Figure 1).
 4 ECONOMICS Figure 1. Elements of corporate culture [4, c.177-178] The value system is the set of basic philosophical ideas and provisions accepted in the organization.
  They are the core of culture and guide the activities of employees, which is the key to success.
  Values ​​are usually conveyed not through formal written procedures but through more subtle methods, such as stories, compositions, and figurative speech.
  Organizations with a strong culture have a richer and more complex value system, which is accepted by all employees.
 Heroes are people who make cultural values ​​a reality and set an example for others.
 Rituals and ceremonies are symbolic events planned in advance, which are included in the daily life of the organization.
  Organizations with a strong culture pay great attention to the elaboration of the ceremonies and demand from the employees their unconditional performance and maintenance.
  They reflect the unique culture of each organization and the specifics of internal governance.
  In one organization they can work effectively, in another they can not.
 The cultural network is independent of titles and positions.
 It is the hidden hierarchy of power in the organization and consists of the roles performed by the employees of the organization.
  It can be identified to some extent with the informal structure.
  A cultural network is an informal means of communication within an organization.
 The basis of any corporate culture is the values ​​and norms that are created by the management of the company, and it is very important that they are accepted by all managers and employees of the company.
  If the values ​​of the company correspond to the personal values ​​of the employee, then they unite people and contribute to the achievement of common goals.
 Personal values ​​are the conscious and accepted common elements that make up the meaning of one's life.
  A value is everything that has a special significance for a person, something that he is ready to protect from other people.
  According to psychologist M. Rokic's values ​​are the deep convictions that determine people's judgments and actions in different situations [1, c.65].
 Each person has personal values.
  They are:  Universal, for example, peace, freedom, love, respect.
 Ային Groups that unite a person into a certain category of people, such as creative freedom, innovative ideas are typical of creative people.
 Ակի Unique, special, which are characteristic of the given person [4, the values ​​that he is loyal to are important for the person and the employee.
  All values ​​are divided into 3 groups [7, c. 39-44] արտահայտ Expressing the meaning of life (ideas about good, evil, happiness, purpose, etc.),  General (health, personal safety, family, education, qualifications, diligence, honesty, freedom of speech, etc.), 6 ECONOMICS  Partial ( attachment to family, homeland, faith in God, striving for perfection, etc.).
 The form and content of these values ​​are created under the influence of many factors, especially the specifics of the country in which the organization operates.
 The value system of a person is formed in the process of learning, during the acquisition of life experience.
  The impact of individual values ​​depends on their degree of clarity and consistency.
  The criteria for the clarity of individual values ​​are [1, c. 66]: գիտ Awareness of the meaning of life,։ Ability to question one's own rigid values, գտ Striving to understand the views of others, պատրաստ Willingness to express one's views freely,  Responsibility,  Simplicity.
 The study and classification of personal values ​​has received the attention of various scholars.
  In the 1990s, researchers put forward a number of unique values ​​that directly affect employees:  Performance (perseverance): work hard to overcome difficulties and get the job done.
  Help and care. Be considerate of other people.
  Honesty. Speak correctly and do what they think is right.
  Justice. to be impartial [1, c. 71] The combined approach of the value system in American, Japanese, and Arab cultures is also noteworthy (see Figure 2).
 7 ECONOMICS Figure 2. Value systems of American, Japanese, and Arab cultures [8, c. 63] American Japanese Arabic 1. Freedom 2. Independence 3. Self-confidence 4. Equality 5. Personalization 6. Competition 7. Efficiency 8. Time 9. Integrity 10. Openness 11. Aggression 12. Immediacy in relationships 13. Orientation to the future 14. Risk Willingness to apply 15. Creativity 16. Personal achievements 17. Victory 18. Money 19. Material property 20. Privacy 1. Belonging 2. Group harmony 3. Collectivism 4. Age / seniority 5. Group agreement 6. Cooperation 7. Quality 8. Patience 9. Relationship mediation 10. Mediation 11. Interpersonal relations 12. Hierarchy 13.
  Changing values ​​is a difficult task for managers, especially when labor values ​​conflict with other values, such as the conflict between work and family interests.
  One of the means of influencing the values ​​of other people is morality, personal example, teaching, non-interference, etc.
 The degree of compatibility of the employee and the company's value system is indicated by the concept of "compatibility" between the individual and the organization.
  If the value system of the new employee is in line with the goals of their managers, the degree of compliance of the individual and the organization increases.
  High compliance correlates positively with low employee turnover.
  The great discrepancy between the value system of the employee and his / her manager is the reason why the employee practically lacks such a feature as devotion to the organization.
 The totality of individual characteristics is also an important factor determining the mutual correspondence of the organization and the individual.
  Not only the common values ​​but also the similarity of individual characteristics contribute to the great compatibility of the organization and the employee.
  Most companies are homogeneous in that they have a certain standard of leadership, that is, they select people with certain personal characteristics.
  Thus, the compatibility of working conditions and individual characteristics of a person is the basis of high labor productivity [1, c. 75] Management's attitude towards the corporate culture of the organization can be dual in nature.
  If the culture does not contradict the goals of the leadership, they will feel comfortable.
  However, when the existing corporate culture does not have a positive impact on the development of the organization, when the goals of the employees do not coincide with the goals of the management, culture can be a serious obstacle to the development of the organization and can even lead to its collapse.
 As a result, the main role of corporate culture from the point of view of managers is to regulate the behavior of employees, which has a positive effect on the performance, promoting the prosperity of the organization, and in the worst case it hinders and slows down the development of the company.
  The level of compliance of the manager's behavior with the general characteristics of the norms of behavior, as well as the asserted values ​​are a fact of the corporate culture of the organization.
 .
