The issue of the limits of the ombudsman's participation in the evidence process is one of the most discussed issues in the jurisprudence, but it has caused controversy, which has been reflected in the issue of considering the ombudsman as a subject of criminal evidence.
  For the analysis of the existing scientific approaches and legal regulations on the Defender as a subject of criminal evidence, it is necessary to consider the following two interrelated questions: a) Is the Defender's participation in the criminal evidence process the latter's right or obligation? B) The Defender as a subject of criminal evidence Does he have a bar exam or not?
 Some authors consider the ombudsman's participation in the criminal evidence process as a right, others as a duty [1, p. 60].
  The legal literature states that the activities of the Defender are of public legal nature (offentliches Amt, fonction publique) [2, p. 199], hence the general duty of the Defender to protect the rights and legitimate interests of the Defender.
  In this regard, V.L. Kudryavtsev noted that Article 49 1 1 of the RF Criminal Procedure Code reflects the obligatory nature of the ombudsman's powers in general, and in this case, the ombudsman's right to suspect and defendant in criminal proceedings in accordance with this Code. and is an advocate for legal aid.
 The term "jurisprudence" is used in the sense of the definition in the literature, according to which authority is a coincidence of rights and responsibilities [3, p. 56].
  This general nature implies that it is necessary to treat the actions of the Defender as permitted and at the same time as obligatory actions to be performed.
  Based on this, the legislator has adopted the descriptive method of legal regulation when defining the concept of "defender", refraining from using the words "has the right" or "is obliged", as the latter does not have the opportunity to clearly regulate the specific situations when the lawyer is endowed with the law. with rights, at the same time bears the obligation to exercise them.
  The general obligation requires the defender to exercise his rights for the purpose of defense, if possible.
  The general obligation to exercise the rights of a lawyer using all means and methods of protection not prohibited by law is also evidenced by the duty of a lawyer enshrined in Article 19 of the RA Law on Advocacy, according to which a lawyer is obliged to honestly and conscientiously protect the client's rights and legal interests. by all means and methods not prohibited.
 As for the question on conducting a legal examination within the framework of considering the Defender as a subject of criminal-judicial evidence, it should be noted that it derives from the Defender's right to collect and present evidence.
  Unlike the RA Criminal Procedure Code, the RF Criminal Procedure Code has provided for the ombudsman's right to collect and present evidence since 2001 (Article 53, Part 1, Clause 2).
  Based on the mentioned innovation, the idea of ​​a parallel or legal examination was put forward, which was not unequivocally accepted by the scientists.
 345 JURISDICTION YG According to the concept developed by Martinchik and the model of the bar examination, the bar examination is considered an integral part of the pre-trial proceedings, which is carried out by a lawyer capable of defending the rights of the suspect, the accused and the legal interests.
  Advocacy, together with investigation and pre-investigation, is a new type of criminal activity, which is carried out within the limits of the mentioned types of pre-trial proceedings and the criminal case initiated by the investigator, investigator or prosecutor on the grounds and in accordance with the procedure of the Russian criminal procedure [4, p. 135].
 In the context of the two conceptual issues of reinterpreting the ideology of competition, in particular, transforming it from a procedural principle into a form of trial (regime), and in order to expand the rights of the defense, the new draft Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) reserves the right to collect and present evidence instead of materials. The issue of the lawyer's ability to conduct a legal examination is also inevitable and legal.
  With the mentioned innovation, as an important precondition for strengthening the guarantees of protection of the rights and freedoms of the individual during the investigation of criminal cases, the elements of competition are expanded.
 There are two opposing approaches to conducting a bar examination in forensics.
 According to the first approach, the ombudsman has the right to conduct a full legal examination, for which he has equal rights as an investigator and an investigator in the field of gathering evidence.
  The supporters of the mentioned approach substantiate their position with the force of the following arguments: See the RA Government 2011. The concept of the new Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Concept) adopted by the protocol decision N 9 of the March 10, 2010 sitting.
 346 JURISDICTION The parties to the accusation and the defense are equal before the court, which derives from the principle of competition, in particular, the requirement of Article 15, Part 4 of the Criminal Procedure Code of the Russian Federation.
 The Defender, as a subject of criminal proceedings in general, and as a subject of criminal proceedings in particular, carries out probative activities through other procedural actions.
  Thus, Article 86 1 1 of the RF Criminal Procedure Code stipulates that evidence is collected through investigative and other legal actions, and Article 3 նույն 3 defines the ways in which a defense counsel collects evidence, which is considered by the ombudsman. other legal actions, as the implementation of investigative actions is not the competence of the Defender.
 The evidence collected by the Defender is classified as "other documents" type of evidence defined by Article 74, Part 2, Clause 6 of the RF Criminal Procedure Code.
  In particular, the proponents of this approach state that the evidence (documents, data, objects) collected by the ombudsman is admissible and relevant, as it is collected on the basis of Article 86 3 3 of the RF Criminal Procedure Code and becomes attached to the criminal case. are the materials of the criminal case [5].
 According to the second approach, the ombudsman's legal examination should be limited to obtaining materials and other documents from state authorities, local self-government bodies, public associations and citizens, as the only subject of gathering evidence should be the investigator.
  The point is that the legislation enshrines only the ombudsman's right to gather evidence, and the procedure for exercising that right is not defined, therefore, as NA Kolokolov rightly noted that the recognition of a new institute for Russian forensics, the legal examination, requires detailed legal regulation.
 This position is substantiated by the existing legislative contradictions in the definition of the ombudsman's powers in the field of gathering evidence.
  Thus, within the framework of the Criminal Procedure Code of the Russian Federation, there is a contradiction between the norms of Article 86 1 3 1 and 3, as the ombudsman is not mentioned among the subjects of gathering evidence defined by Article 86 1 1, while listed in Part 3 of the same Article are the means of gathering evidence by the defender.
 In addition, under Article 86 3 3 of the RF Criminal Procedure Code, the ombudsman has the right to gather evidence, whereas under Article 6 3 3 of the Federal Law of the Russian Federation on Advocacy and Advocacy (hereinafter referred to as the Federal Law): The ombudsman has the right to collect data, make inquiries, collect and present objects and documents that can be recognized as material and other evidence in the manner prescribed by law.
  That is, according to the RF Criminal Procedure Code, the ombudsman collects evidence, and according to the Federal Law, he collects materials that are not considered evidence in themselves, but in order to be considered evidence, it is necessary to recognize their evidence in the manner prescribed by law.
 This indicates that in the conditions of such legal regulation, the Defender is not considered a full-fledged subject of evidence from the point of view of gathering evidence.
  In this regard, we consider it necessary to mention the relevant provision in Clause 2.38 of the Concept, which is aimed at strengthening the elements of competition: “Based on the presumption of legality of the judicial information provided by the Defender, the materials submitted by him are considered admissible evidence, unless the body conducting the proceedings to prove the opposite.
  Moreover, the documents or items submitted by the Defender must in all cases remain in the materials of the criminal case, regardless of the attitude of the body conducting the proceedings towards them.
  At the same time, the Defender reserves the right to question individuals and seek expert opinion.
 ».
 In general, the jurisprudence states that four "proper" rules must be observed in determining the admissibility of evidence: 1. proper procedural procedure for obtaining evidence, 2. proper subject for obtaining evidence, 3. proper source for obtaining evidence, 4. proper manner of obtaining evidence [ 7, p. 372].
 We believe that the above-mentioned contradictions should not serve as a basis for the defense attorney not to see the subject of proof, in particular, the subject entitled to conduct a legal examination, but it is necessary to define the ways of resolving the mentioned contradictions at the same time.
  Thus, in order not to question the admissibility of the evidence obtained by the defense counsel, it is necessary to envisage such legal regulations, according to which the evidence obtained by the defense counsel will comply with the four "proper" rules of admissibility of evidence.
 One of the effective ways to solve this problem is the conceptual provision set forth in Clause 2.38 of the above-mentioned Concept.
 As a result of the above, we can state that as a result of exercising the right to collect evidence, the main direction of the ombudsman's judicial activity is the implementation of evidentiary actions.
  In this regard, we attach importance to the provision of the concept of "evidentiary action" in the Draft, which is missing in the RA Criminal Procedure Code.
  Pursuant to Article 6 38 38 of the Draft, the evidentiary action taken by the investigator or the court, as well as by the investigative body (on the investigator's instruction) or the expert (on the investigator's or court's instruction) is a procedural action provided by this Code. proof.
  We consider that the ombudsman should be included in the list of litigants acting as evidence. through the execution of envisaged probative actions, ... ”
  Thus, under Article 49 1 1 (5) of the Draft, the ombudsman reserves the right to obtain and present evidence for attachment and examination to the proceedings, but what actions are not taken in the Draft.
  For that, it is necessary to mention the ombudsman as a subject of evidentiary actions, as the latter's activity is carried out on the basis of the principles of competition and equality and is of probative nature.
 Ձեւ The wording of the draft "Proceedings and other proceedings" under Article 95 of the draft "other person duly defined by this Code".
  In particular, according to the mentioned article, the protocols of evidentiary actions are the documents envisaged by this Code and written, which reflect the circumstances relevant for the proceedings, directly perceived by another proper person defined by this Code during the performance of evidentiary actions.
  In other words, within the framework of the mentioned article, the Defender can and in our opinion should consider another appropriate person defined by this Code during the performance of evidentiary actions, the circumstances of which are directly perceived and relevant for the proceedings are reflected in the protocols of evidentiary actions.
 The above proposal derives a variety of evidentiary actions, such as a defensive action, in connection with which we propose the following definition: a defensive action is an evidentiary action provided by this Code by the Defender.
 Taking into account the classic rule of definition of evidence, according to which evidence consists of three elements, we find that the defense's evidence, ie defense actions, should also be considered under the realization of three elements of evidence, as a result, the ombudsman should be considered as independent and full. subject.
  It follows that the justifications presented for the bar examination can be implemented with the introduction of the mentioned institute.
  Based on this, we propose to define the notion of "advocacy proceedings" at the legislative level, and to view defense actions based on it as procedural actions.
  In particular, we propose to make the following changes and additions to the Draft: 1. In the concept of "procedural action" given in Article 6, Clause 37 of the Draft, add the words "or by the Defender" after the word "ex officio".
 2. To supplement the RA Criminal Procedure Code with the following notion of "advocacy proceedings": advocacy proceedings are the procedure for fixing the results of the ombudsman's evidentiary actions.
 3. To supplement the RA Criminal Procedure Code with an article entitled "Methods and means of defense", in which it is necessary to fix the procedures for the application of means and methods of gathering evidence: judicial and / or notarial deposition, inquiries, requesting documents, motions, etc.
  That is, as a result of gathering evidence in such ways, they already acquire the status of evidence, regardless of their attachment to the criminal case.
 It should be noted that neither the current Criminal Procedure Code nor the Draft Defender is included in the list of 351 JURISDICTION evidences.
  Despite the fact that the Criminal Procedure Code does not enshrine the Defender as a subject of evidence, as a result of the development of criminal procedure law, as already mentioned, the Draft Defender reserves the right to collect evidence, which is one of the elements of evidence.
 It should also be noted that the Draft has changed the concept of proof, as a result of the literal interpretation of which we can also prove from the change in the purpose of proof that the defense attorney is indirectly considered a subject of proof, as proof is a combination of three elements.
  Thus, according to Article 101 of the Draft, the evidence is the collection, verification and evaluation of evidence for the purpose of confirming or refuting the factual circumstances envisaged by this Code, as well as other circumstances relevant to the proceedings.
  The aim of refuting the factual circumstances subject to proof is pursued not only by the public participants in the proceedings (Article 18, Part 2 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code), but also by the Defender (Article 6, Clause 28 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code).
 In order to maximize the principle of competition, as well as to increase the role of the defense counsel in the field of evidence, it is suggested in the forensic science, in addition to considering the subject of gathering evidence, to classify the latter as one of the subjects authorized to check and evaluate evidence.
  This is evidenced by the fact that the Defender has the authority to carry out the three elements of evidence [8, pp. 187-188], examines the evidence through other legal actions and evaluates them with his own conviction [9], the examination and evaluation by the Defender is criminal. In case of getting acquainted with the materials of the case, submitting motions, expressing his position on the admissibility of this or that evidence to the prosecution and the court [5], it is also stated that the defense attorney is obliged to check and evaluate all the evidence in the case and 352 JURISDICTION should be considered an equal subject of evidence. from the point of view of inspection and evaluation [10, p. 97].
 However, M.M. Schaefer does not consider the ombudsman a complete subject for examining and evaluating the evidence.
  He considers the ombudsman to be a subject of examination and evaluation of evidence only in the sense that he carries out intellectual activities within the framework of his judicial status, but the results of such activities have no probative value and are limited to initiating petitions to declare inadmissible by comparative analysis and comparison of evidence. and as a result of the assessment, influencing the internal conviction of the body conducting the criminal proceedings through mediations, defense speech, remarks.
  M.M. Schaefer rules out the existence of a defense attorney's right to review evidence by obtaining other evidence, arguing that the defense attorney cannot present evidence in a judicial form.
  The latter has the right to initiate motions only to obtain new evidence.
 The ombudsman has no right to declare the evidence inadmissible as a result of the evaluation of the evidence, as he does not have the authority to do so, but he can use the above-mentioned legal means to make the evidence inadmissible by the competent body. [11]
 Having in mind the vision of expanding the elements of competition, we find that it can be feasible in case of envisaging the mentioned arguments against the ombudsman having the right to prove himself, relevant legislative changes aimed at solving the problems.
  In particular, փաստ "Exclusion of the right of the defense attorney to examine the evidence by obtaining other evidence on the grounds that the defense counsel can not present evidence in a judicial form", the problem can be solved by moving the idea of ​​the bar exam in forensics 353 JURISDICTION from theoretical to legislative and law enforcement areas.
 Փաստ The argument that the ombudsman has the right to initiate motions only to obtain new evidence contradicts the ombudsman's right to gather evidence, which is already provided for in the Russian legislation, and in the Republic of Armenia it is envisaged in the draft and is one of the most important solutions.
  In addition, in addition to obtaining new evidence, the ombudsman retains motions, such as the right to file a motion to testify in Article 306 of the Draft.
  Regarding the argument "Defender has no right to declare evidence inadmissible as a result of assessing the evidence, as he is not endowed with powers", we should state that the inadmissibility of evidence is the purpose of the defense's assessment of evidence and not the result, and in our opinion the result of assessing evidence should be admissible. stating his position on it in the relevant judicial act.
  We propose to envisage the defense act in the criminal procedure legislation as a summary of the results of the ombudsman's assessment - motions, statements, complaints and expression of a systematic position, which, like the indictment, is subject to submission to the court in the criminal case.
  We consider that the defense act has an equal right to exist in the indictment, especially considering that the final assessment of the factual circumstances for the settlement of the case is the court, which is not constrained by the parties, in this case, the indictment and the defense, respectively. based on the evaluation results.
  Thus, we propose to add the words "defense act" after the word "decision" in the notion of a judicial act given in Article 6, Clause 33 of the Draft, and to add the notion of a defense act in the notions, defining it as a procedural expression expressing the defense position on criminal circumstances. act.
 It should be noted that the same provision was proposed in the forensic science as a mechanism to neutralize the accusatory tendency of the investigator's activity.
  In particular, G.G. Skerebets proposed to enshrine at the legislative level the following rule: "The ombudsman draws up a defense opinion on the basis of the evidence in the case and submits it to the court."
 As a result of the above-mentioned analyzes, we find that even in the case of exercising the right of evidence, the defense attorney carries out activities inherent in the evidence, therefore, we believe that it is necessary to envisage an article entitled “Participants in evidence”, which should include evidence collection, verification and evaluation. ombudsman, which is a solid foundation for building a defensive position and can serve as one of the preconditions for the effective regulation of the right to defense.
 Based on the above, we conclude that by envisaging new legal regulations for the active and full participation of the defense counsel in the proof process and enshrining the defense counsel as an independent subject at the legislative level, the protection of the defendant's interests will be more effective. but also for the whole examination.
 .
