One of the important trends in the development of the modern tourism market is the change in the format of the relationship between the main market participants, creators of tourism products and consumers, which is due to the process of increasing the demand for tourism services.
  If at the end of the 20th century the tourist demand was still formed under the influence of the 381 TOURISM tourism supply, then during the almost two decades since the beginning of the 21st century the development of the situation "turned" in the opposite direction.
  The deepening of both organizational and content differentiation of consumer needs became obvious, which is based first of all on the expansion of people's information and material opportunities.
  The Future Traveler Tribes 2020 report prepared by Amadeus IT Group experts recognized the "humanization of technology" as a sustainable trend in the modern development of travel companies, which means "intuitive interaction between travelers and their customers".
  Moreover, according to experts, future travelers, becoming more and more informed, will show more demanding and selective behavior, so travel companies must be ready to meet the growing variety of needs.
  Thus, in the current conditions of tourism development, the supply of services is fully driven by demand, as tourists not only actively participate in the process of creating tourism (organized tourism), but also, using new advances in information technology, can design their own tour (unorganized tourism). ).
 Consumer perception of the tour product and the formation of the corresponding demand presupposes our clarification of the concepts of "tourism product" and "value of tourism product".
  The tourism product is a complete set of services that can be sold in the format of a tourism package.
  The latter, in turn, includes at least two service functions related to transport (and related), hotel (and related) services, as well as services When the tourist independently plans and organizes his trip without the mediation of a travel agency. .
 382 TOURISM, which is not related to transport and hotel services and is an essential part of tourism output [2].
  Within the framework of this interpretation, the concept is defined first of all from the point of view of the producer.
  However, the tourist perceives the tourist result more broadly, because for him it is not just a complex of services, but also a set of different impressions.
  That is why, speaking about the demand for tourism products, it is more expedient to use the term "value of tourism products".
 It should be noted that a general description of the value of the tourism product has not been developed yet.
  In a broad sense, it can represent different combinations of values ​​that are independent of each other, the degree of influence of individual components on the consumer's decision can be quite different (Shet-Newman - Gross concept of five values) [3].
  In a narrow sense, the value of the tourism product is a certain consumer benefit, which is quite individualized for a specific tourist.
  In the context of individualized tourism demand, the idea of ​​creating a value chain for tourism arises, which is based on the premise that each product (service) requires a certain algorithm of value-creating operations, which is performed by a certain number of performers to form a complete value-creation system. creating system) [4].
  The concept of "tourism product value chain" is defined as a stable structure with a long-term orientation, consisting of partner organizations with equal rights in terms of doing business and serving unique markets [5].
  In contrast to the earlier approach proposed by M. Porter 2, the modern concept of value chain management assumes that the chain model includes not only internal but also boi for the participating company. Initially, Porter assumed that value chain creation was carried out only within a separate enterprise.
 TOURISM All external processes so that the chain is the result of multi-level interaction of a whole network of companies (value nets).
  The true evidence of this provision can be found in the current developments of the tourism business. Although the individual components of a complex tour product play different roles in generating demand, the total consumer value of a tourism product is formed through the joint work of all the structures involved in creating the value chain.
 The phenomenon of value chain creation in the field of tourism is observed by researchers from different scientific perspectives: economics and management, marketing and logistics, recreational geography and sustainable development management of territories, etc.
  Moreover, as it often happens with interdisciplinary phenomena, there is no common scientific approach.
  A study of a number of works on this topic suggests that most of them are based on the so-called SCM (Supply Chain Management) approach, or supply chain concept.
  Western authors more often use the narrow field TSC (Tourism Supply Chain) approach.
  A comparative analysis of the concept of "tourism product value chain" observed in a number of scientific studies is presented in Table 1.
 which integrates all types of tourism activities and implements the most optimal management of information, financial, personnel and tourism flows in a minimum of time [10] Tourism value accumulation system, which includes four types of supply chains. 1) Transportation services, 2) Accommodation and entertainment services, 3) Tourist sales network: tour operators and tour operators, 4) Tourists [11] The chain includes five segments of production: accommodation, catering, travel, transport and public catering. Author J.Denman TOURISM trade.
  It is emphasized that within each sector, several supply chains can be formed. [12] A logistics chain for the provision of tourism services as an association of economic units (legal entities and individuals) that are directly involved in the sale of core and ancillary services, as well as their design. Necessary information, financial and human resources.
 The primary role is given to ZTLK (Tourism Information Logistics Center) [13] TSCs - tourism supply chains are defined as networks of tourism organizations, which form the final value with the help of various services provided in a specific destination and include a wide range of private and private participants. [14] The elements of the chain are integrated in the functional circles of the application of logistical actions related to the creation of the tour product. Supply (service providers and their intermediaries), production (tour operators), sales (tour operators and consumers) [15] The tourism product value chain is a form of inter-organizational network relationship in the tourism sector that has a stable structure.
  Therefore, in cases where the value creation phase is represented by a group of participants, we are dealing with a tourism value chain network.
  However, the key feature of such cooperation is the "horizontal" value chain.
  In this regard, we find it expedient to slightly rethink the traditional one-way supply chain and present it as follows: first combine the mutually oriented positions of the S (supply) and D (demand) chains, as well as add the third, the R (reselling) position of the bidirectional bidirectional counter-direction.
  The proposed idea is shown in Figure 1.
 Provider dominates / Supply dominant NOTE AYUTYUNNERI Sh UKAYAKAN AGENTS PROVIDERS (service providers)  Transportation  Accommodation  Food  Excursion Entertainment service   Additional services 1. Tour Operators 2. travel agents, brokers 3. Reservations digital platforms F BOSASHRJAYIN of consumers - tourists dominated Mediator / Reselling dominant Consumer dominance / Demand dominant Figure 1. The system of creating the value of the tourism product by combining different chains 387 TOURISM The system in the picture assumes that this or the link in the value chain of the tourism product can dominate, depending on the specific operating conditions of the system.
  As can be seen from the picture, in the field of tourism it can be manifested in three ways. 1. When uniform ready-made tour packages are offered to the market, ie the result is initially predetermined and there are fully standardized delivery procedures.
  In this case, the supply chain 3 dominates.
 2. In the case of special, exclusive tourism orders (individual or VIP tours), the emphasis on demand increases, forming a value chain in which the consumer circle dominates.
 3. The most popular option in the developed competitive tourism market is the third option, when the consumer has a wide range of differentiation of tour package components-services and can choose one of the dozens of ready-made packages for the same destination, which will best suit his needs.
  In this case, there is a more active cooperation between supply and demand, especially at the level of tour organization, ie in the situation of dominance of the mediator, in which case, in our opinion, the most effective value chain of the tourism product is formed.
 The dominance of the intermediary chain is, as a rule, more often expressed in the creation of the value of the tourism product. It should be said that any service provider or counter-agent (hotel, transport company, HSSO, entertainment organization, etc.) should dominate the supply chain.
  Sometimes there are situations when another member of the chain has to obey one of the providers due to its monopoly position.
  For example, the famous Olkho Island on Lake Baikal is connected to the mainland only by water transport.
  The transportation is carried out by the only monopolist company, the work schedule of which must be adjusted to the other participants in the value chain of the given tourism product - providers of other services, intermediaries and consumers.
  Similar cases can be found in different destinations of the world.
 388 TOURISM came in chains in the process of organizing incoming and outgoing tours.
  However, in the case of narrower geographical tours (for example, in the territories of neighboring countries without visa restrictions, or in the territories of countries cooperating closely within a certain regional association, and especially within domestic tours), one of the supply chain participants can play a dominant role in the tourism product value chain. .
 It should be emphasized that today the value chain mediator can be represented not only by tour operators and tour agencies.
  Perhaps the most recent trend in the development of the tourism industry is reflected in the growing role of websites and specialized portals.
  The latter act as intermediaries between consumers and tourism service providers, are "armed" with the necessary information search mechanisms and offer a wide range of services and tours.
  Popular Internet platforms such as Expedia, TripAdvisor, Booking.com, Yahoo Travel, Priceline, Travelocity, EnglandNet, Skyscanner, Kayak, Jizo, Momondo, etc., are the most powerful meta-search engines, the advantage of which is the huge amount of valuable information provided to the consumer.
  In addition to commercial information, these platforms include useful tips for travelers, guides with descriptions of tourist centers and attractions, various interactive maps, weather forecasts, exchange rates, and more.
  Users of platforms are almost relieved of the need to obtain information from other sources.
  In addition, the key to the success of large online booking platforms are the advantages that make these online resources profitable from 389 TOURISM tour operators and tour operators.
  These benefits include: շուրջ 24-hour booking availability, արագ Ability to quickly change or cancel bookings,  Customer support service in native or other accessible languages, մշտ Permanent special promotions, հ Huge databases of hotels and transport companies around the world, պաշտպան Secured internet connection channels  Existence of opinions and hints of hundreds of people sharing their own experience, հնարավոր Ability to provide feedback.
 It is also interesting to note that the services of tourism companies in the world today are mainly used by people with lower incomes and relatively low level of education, who live in small settlements, sometimes in the absence of necessary communications, often with insufficient knowledge and financial resources.
  These factors cause insurmountable difficulties in making reservations for this category of people, so the most affordable and safe way to travel is to use the services of a travel company.
  In contrast, "independent" (unorganized) tourists have a high level of education, knowledge of at least one foreign language, and high IT awareness, typically living in large cities and earning above-average incomes.
 Some tourism experts believe that the unprecedented development of online mediation in recent years and the growing awareness of young consumers in the field of digital technology will gradually lead to the gradual disappearance of offline tourism intermediaries - tour operators and travel agents.
  This, in turn, will change the structure of the value chain of the tourism product, in which the organizations that create and sell complex travel products will no longer be available.
  And as the demand for these services in the major sending regions of the world is really declining, it can be assumed that tour operators and tour operators will gradually position themselves in the segment of exclusive, personalized tours, which is quite promising today and can be a vector for further development of global tourism business. to become the direction.
 In case of such a development, the dominance of the consumer in the value chain of the tourism product will be finally established, and the chains of demand will find the greatest spread.
 .
