The public procurement system, regardless of the level of development of the country, has an important role in the economy, and in this respect it is not an exception for the 253 MANAGEMENT of the Armenian economy.
  When studying public procurement issues, the need to maintain the efficiency, transparency and legality of the procurement system is considered first.
  However, we find that the vector of public procurement development, aimed at the development of "sustainable" procurement, which is not raised in Armenia at both state and expert levels, is no less important.
  It is noteworthy that this is not a purely video-methodological problem, as the lack of a development vector causes an obvious rift in the core of the country's declared sustainable and long-term economic development.
  Therefore, it is necessary to identify and understand not only the existing shortcomings and omissions of the procurement system, but also the need to change the vector of its development.
 "Green" or "sustainable" procurement is now widely recognized as a strategic lever for sustainable development and innovation.
  2018 The UN Sustainable Development Goals reaffirmed the strong link between environmental protection, sustainable development and public procurement [2, p. 3].
  The UN Public Procurement System is seen as a platform to accelerate the formation of a "cyclical" circular economy (Platform for It is clear that the "sustainable" or "green" environmental procurement approach has fundamentally changed the procurement concept and it is no longer anchored. on purchasing the cheapest supplies and services.
  According to the OECD (1997) The report marks the beginning of the policy of promoting sustainable procurement policy in 1991. With a strategy developed by the Danish government [7, pp. 13-20].
  Then, in the late 1990s, the "green" procurement approach spread to national, regional, and international levels.
  (Such a rapid development of events).
  The rapid introduction of green procurement by many countries was, in fact, a response to the deteriorating environment and the reckless use of natural resources, and it was also initiated by various international and regional organizations, including the UN agencies, the OECD. , The World Trade Organization and the European Commission.
 Socio-ecological management Ecological component Housing use, prevention of environmental pollution, etc. Eco-economic management Sustainable activity Social component Economic component Cost reduction, economic growth, etc. Increase in prevention of discrimination, etc. Socio-economic management Chart 12 Sustainable activity chart pp. 251-264] Based on the Sustainable Development Concept, British businessman and consultant John Elkington [9] 1994 developed the "three-dimensional" concept of companies' activities.
  The essence of "sustainable development" is the preservation of the integrity of the environment as a result of the company's activities, preventing it from non-renewable consumption of resources, as well as using the prevention of long-term crisis consequences.
  It presupposes a balance between the management of the company and the environmental, social and economic responsibilities of the business [4, pp. 18-34].
 255 MANAGEMENT When describing "sustainable" procurement, experts say that it is "the acquisition of goods and services in a way that will ensure the least impact on society and the environment throughout the life cycle of the product" [6].
  The above simply proves that the change in the concept of procurement is profound and it has long had its practical impact.
  This means that, in general, the goal of sustainable and environmental development has been projected by state bodies, organizations and private companies and transformed into a procurement process.
  As a result, the procurement system is now described as a "sustainable" or "green" procurement system with all the components typical of its matrix.
 The United Nations Environment Program (UNDP) defines sustainable public procurement as “the process by which government agencies meet their needs for goods, services, works and utilities so that the value for money or PDA (VfM) is assessed. on the basis of the whole life cycle, provided that the benefits are generated not only for the organization, but also for the society and the economy, at the same time significantly reducing the negative impacts on the environment ”[2, p. 5].
  The mentioned can be considered one of the most complete definitions of KG.
 Table 1. Comprehensive components of value for life [8, p. 24] Acquisition cost Acquisition or purchase cost Delivery insurance and taxes Installation and support Operating costs Work Materials Consumables Energy supply Consumer Consumer is verified before receiving the tender offer) Maintenance costs - Work,Specialist - Professional tools - Spare parts and replacement parts - Decreased productivity due to equipment age - Service frequency and downtime - Service and inspection modes - Equipment downtime costs - Transaction and supplier management costs - Operating costs - Environmental costs - Necessary Expenses related to (for example, use of alternative materials) Use of goods, equipment,decommissioning costs - Safe disposal - Resale - Current liabilities - Dismantling - Sale or disposal costs - Rehabilitation of industrial land and reconstruction of buildings and structures for alternative use The term is considered as a component of the broader concept of "sustainable" procurement.
  The "cyclical" procurement approach leads to "green" public procurement, in which special attention is paid to the acquisition of works, goods or services in an effort to promote the use of closed-circuit energy and material values ​​in supply chains.
  At the same time, it leads to minimal impact on the environment and elimination of negative impacts and reduction of waste during the whole life cycle of goods and services. ” priorities, possible risks and challenges in the process, and develop a complete matrix of "green" procurement program.
 The introduction of education in Armenia should take into account the political, economic and social environment, local culture and traditions, as well as the technical components involved in its implementation.
 The policy implemented for the implementation of the problem and the roadmap providing its practical part require its solution to be addressed in several axes: a) management, including organizational and administrative, b) legal regulation, c) application of state financial and non-financial incentive structures, d) personnel scaling up training, e) awareness and (dissemination).
 It is necessary to determine the effective model of "green" procurement, and the most important priorities in it.
  The roadmap for the implementation of "green" procurement also requires focusing on five closely related axes. 1) Promoters of sustainable procurement, 2) Barriers and barriers and difficulties, 3) Impact of sustainable procurement on the operational, financial, economic, environmental, social functions and condition of organizations, 4) Feedback on identified factors, 5) The role of the person involved in “green” procurement and the discovery of motivation.
 GOVERNANCE Organizational "green" procurement policy requires that "green" procurement tasks be defined for each state body and agency, and management and control structures (or mechanisms) and reporting systems be developed and implemented.
  For that, it will be necessary to develop a "green" procurement guide and implementation manual, which will present the principles, criteria, implementation structures of "green" procurement.
 There are basically two approaches to promoting "green" shopping.
  In particular, in the French model, the process is organized from the top to the bottom, when the central government draws up a procurement plan, which is implemented at lower levels of government.
 An alternative is the bottom-up approach used in Switzerland, where the lower echelons and local governments themselves dictate the process, with the government providing only assistance and assistance (this can also be explained by the Swiss state confederation).
  It would be more expedient for Armenia to use a mixed version of the two models, in the first stage giving preference to the top-down model, which should be gradually replaced by the second model, while maintaining the imperative component of "green" procurement for some services and works by law.
 Another important direction is the formation of cooperation between state bodies and agencies of environmental protection in the Republic of Armenia and state bodies (bodies) and organizations carrying out procurement.
  Such cooperation is one of the important components of increasing the efficiency of "green" procurement, it should be coordinated by the authorized procurement regulatory body, the RA Ministry of Finance.
 In order to effectively build the "green" procurement policy of the Republic of Armenia in practice, it is very important to take into account the content of that policy, the method of implementation and the procedures.
  As a result of the "green" procurement policy, the key to implementation will be the criteria that will be used. (a) to rate products and services as 'green'; (b) to rank and rank suppliers on a sustainable basis.
 In particular, in terms of the characteristics of "green" products, it is necessary to avoid contradictory or tangled confusion of "green" purchases, for which the standards of green products should be clearly defined.
  The problem is that "green" products and products are given different names, for example, they include products with environmental marking or labeling, energy-saving products and products.
 Environmentally labeled products, energy-saving products and energy-saving products have certain similarities.
  In some cases, all of them are called "green" products.
  Thus, there is, in fact, no clear definition of a "green" product.
  The mentioned problem will cause certain complexes and confusion on the one hand, among the producers and in the sphere of industry, on the other hand, among the staff engaged in public procurement.
  Manufacturers use resources (finance, time, and energy) to meet the requirements for different types of environmental labels.
  Public procurement staff, on the other hand, have to spend resources (finances, time and energy) to learn about the variety of green product symbols.
  By the way, the situation is similar in developing countries, particularly in China [11, pp. 1034-1045].
  If you mean that the problem also applies to imported products and products, it becomes more complicated, because the green labels of different countries may have different criteria.
  To avoid such inconsistencies (or confusion), a unified system of national standards for green produce based on international standards is proposed.
 It is obvious that the definition of a non-prudent list of "green" products and products can violate the principle of open and fair competition.
  In this case (in the case) it is necessary to be guided in the process of product selection by the principle of fair competition and protection of the competitive market, as its neglect can lead to monopolies and corruption.
 The introduction of a "green" procurement system requires the formation of an appropriate legal system, which will contribute to the scale of the "green" procurement process.
  The legal regulation of "green" procurement, in its turn, has several legislative axes.
 The legal regulation strategy of "green" procurement in the Republic of Armenia should be considered in the short and long term.
  From a short-term point of view, it is expedient for the RA Government to adopt a regulation on "green" procurement, according to which "green" procurement will be carried out in accordance with the regulations (within the framework) of the current law on procurement.
 In the long run, the Government of the Republic of Armenia should plan the adoption of the Law on Green Procurement (the name is conditional), which will clearly define ՝ "sustainable" or "green" procurement agents and their responsibilities, "green product standards and green procurement list" and other issues. .
 It is expedient to avoid many definitions in the law and it is desirable to integrate "green" products with energy-saving products, which is an approach accepted in international practice.
 In terms of the legal components of green procurement, it is necessary to separate the criteria for green procurement in the procurement process, which refers to the characteristics of goods, services and services and the bidders.
 In order to ensure long-term trends in the formation of the green procurement market, it is expedient to define the category of "eco-friendly goods" ("EcoFriendly Goods") in the legislation of the Republic of Armenia, and later in the law on education, for example the interpretation of Japanese law. wherein, in particular, the term is used as goods or services which conform to any of the following: (a) Recyclable resources and other raw materials or components that contribute to the reduction of the environmental impact burden.
 (b) Products that contribute to the reduction of the environmental impact, including the use of raw materials or other components, including the reduction of the environmental impact of greenhouse gas emissions, are accompanied by the use of products that contribute to the reduction of waste, in whole or in part. subject to reuse or recycling.
 c) Services that contribute to the reduction of the burden of harmful effects on the environment, including through the use of supplied goods [1, p. 2].
 Developed countries carry out their "green" purchases on the basis of legislation.
  Thus, the legal basis for public procurement in the field of sustainable procurement in the United States is federal laws and executive orders.
  As an example, we can mention the US Government's 1998 Order Order 13101, which sets requirements for waste reduction, resource processing and procurement of green products.
  Japan Promotes Procurement of Ecologically Clean Goods and Services by Government and Other Authorities, 2000 Law [1, p. 2], which stipulates that all central government bodies must develop and implement a green procurement plan and submit a report to the Minister of Environment.
 Local governments should do everything possible to make an annual plan for "green" procurement.
 An important component of the "green" procurement system will be the information infrastructure, which is of practical application for public procurement planning and control.
  The creation of a "green" procurement information infrastructure is necessary for the development of a state "green" procurement policy and the compilation of a sample list of procurement goods, products or raw materials.
 The relevant information platform will provide procurement staff and suppliers with up-to-date information on "green" procurement, including information on products, products, raw materials, materials, technologies, "green" manufacturers.
 The development of the "green" procurement system requires the parallel development of the "green" product market and the components of its structure.
 The other important component of the education system is the financial resources required for state green procurement, as the prices of "green" goods will obviously be high.
  Budget financing is important for the implementation of public procurement programs.
  It should be taken into account that the production of green products requires high technologies and investments and the production process may be more complicated compared to other products, therefore the prices of green products will be objectively higher.
  If, due to insufficient funding, the basis for procurement remains the criterion for selection of tenders with lower costs, then the green procurement process can be considered endangered and even failed.
  In the case where the purchase price is the most important factor in choosing a competitor, given that it meets a purely functional requirement without taking into account the cost or cost of its life cycle (CPI), green products and purchases will be at a disadvantage.
  Instead, the assessment of PDA should be based on an assessment of the entire service life cycle of the product, that is, the cost of the entire cycle of acquisition, production, use or exploitation, utilization or processing of the product.
 The toolkit of the state policy on sustainable development, including the promotion of education, is diverse and includes: a) additional financial resources directly allocated to the Ministry of Education and Science, b) state subsidies and the application of targeted tax exemptions or "non-green" (non-organic) and or exacerbation mechanisms for the taxation of harmful products, (c) measures for the utilization of used goods, decommissioned production facilities.
 In any case, the issue of green or sustainable procurement requires it to be discussed simultaneously on several axes: economic, social, environmental and only then to come out with an integral assessment.
 In terms of obstacles and barriers to the introduction of green procurement, it is noteworthy that the green procurement process, as a rule, is faced with an unfavorable environment.
  First of all, the level of awareness, lack of information and weak public propaganda are unfavorable for the promotion of green procurement in Armenia.
 It was mentioned above that the situation in the Republic of Armenia is such that the importance of the problem and its implementation is not even mentioned in any program document of the Government of the Republic of Armenia.
  On the other hand, an important component in the implementation of the policy is the awareness of the public about the green procurement policy and problems and the education process.
  This presupposes great efforts to raise public awareness of the importance of 264 GOVERNMENT procurement and to place it at the heart of the content of public procurement.
  It should be noted at once that the staff engaged in public procurement in the Republic of Armenia, in fact, has insufficient knowledge not only about "sustainable" or "green" procurement but also about sustainable development.
 .
