It is impossible to imagine the development of a modern city without the improvement of the inner-city passenger transport system.
  International experience shows that there is a correlation between the economic development of the country and the state of the transport systems of the cities, in which the metro has a special role.
 It should be noted that the level of public transport service in Armenia is extremely low.
  It has a number of objective and subjective reasons, in particular: Ֆիզ Physical and moral depreciation of the rolling stock of passenger transport, աղ Slowing down of the process of rolling stock renewal;  Non-compliance of road transport highways with modern requirements; ոչ Irrational and unequal distribution of passenger transport by types of transport;
 The metro is able to effectively solve the transport problems of the city, not only providing people with a guaranteed time of transportation, but also improving the economic situation.
  In fact, it is the only type of intra-city high-speed public transport.
  In addition, the subway is less affected by economic factors.
  Here the technical decisions are more important, as well as the longer-term nature and conditions of the rolling stock and equipment operation service.
 71 ECONOMICS The analysis of alternatives for the development of surface public transport shows that the capital investment in the construction of appropriate highways and streets, the dismantling of buildings and structures, the rearrangement of engineering communications is 1.5-2 times higher than the cost of the metro transport system].
  In addition, the level of development of land transport has a certain limit, which is conditioned by the technical and urban development opportunities of the latter.
 The advantage of the metro is that it is located mainly in the underground area and does not interfere with the planning work of the city.
  The latter allows organizing passenger transportation regardless of the traffic intensity and weather conditions.
  Taking into account the high capacity of the metro, in particular, if the transport capacity of overland transport is 4-5 thousand. people / hour, the maximum speed is 60 km / h, and the minimum movement interval is 180 seconds, then in the case of the metro these indicators are 50-55 thousand, respectively. man / hour, 90 km / h and 90 seconds, then it becomes logical the fact that the solution of the transport problem in all major cities of the world is carried out in favor of the construction of new subway lines.
  However, very often, due to financial problems, the solution of the latter is postponed indefinitely.
 Metros are considered to be loss-making organizations and need external financing in order to operate (especially develop).
 In most of the world's metros, external financing comes from several sources (state budget, community budget, private sector).
  In our country, the metro is financed only from the state budget.
  The subsidy allocated to the Yerevan metro from the state budget according to the year 72 ECONOMICS had a tendency of growth, in particular, in 2005-2014. The amount allocated from the state budget to the metro has increased from 697 million to 1 billion 855 million.
  The amount of subsidy has increased 1.6 times, taking into account the consumer price index (1 billion 099 million) in the mentioned period.
  According to the observation of the metro revenue structure over the years, we notice that the subsidy averages 55% of the total revenue.
  2014 it amounted to 41.3% of revenues. Figure 1. Revenue structure of Yerevan metro in 2014 (Compiled according to the data of the results of the work of the Yerevan Metro for 2005-2015) Passenger transportation Advertising Subsidy Rent Other Service Grant The analysis shows that, at first glance, the revenues of the metro have provided growth by years.
  In particular, in 2005 the revenue from passenger transportation was 42% in total, in 2010 - 25.7%, which is due to 2010. 110 million drams with additional financial assistance provided by the state to the metro.
 2013 This indicator increased by 10.9 percentage points, making 36%.
  However, if we take into account that in 2014 The volume of paid passenger transportation was 14 072 thousand. passenger, and in 2010 The same indicator was 18 161 thousand, then we will see that the growth of income 73 ECONOMICS is not conditioned by the increase of passenger flow.
  The reason for the latter is the fare increase from 2011.
  The metro traffic tariff is set by the Yerevan Municipality upon the proposal of the Board of Directors of "Yerevan Metro after Karen Demirchyan" CJSC, in coordination with the RA Ministry of Economic Development and Investment.
  The fare of the Yerevan metro was changed in 2003. on September 1, from 40 drams to 50 drams, and in 2011 The tariff of 100 drams has been in force since July 1, 2010.
  As we mentioned, in the structure of incomes, the incomes from passenger transportation have the largest share (except for the subsidy).
  This is due to the fact that the income from non-core activities (advertising, rent, etc.) can be said to be stable and their variations over the years have not been large. The sharp increase in income from non-core activities is due to the conclusion of contracts with specialized organizations.
  In other words, it can be argued that incomes from non-core activities can not be considered as a serious source of additional funding.
 As for the subsidy provided by the state, it should be noted that although according to the years there is a significant increase of the latter and in 2008. The amount of the latter has increased 2.5 times compared to 2005, in particular, in 2008. amount in 2005 increased by 136.4% compared to 2010 2008 compared to 1.1 times (11.6%) in 2014 growth in 2010 It did not improve the company's financial situation, as changes in wages and legislation (increase in the minimum wage, inflation, increase in tax rates, etc.) led to an increase in the company's expenses.
  If we add to this the observed dynamics of the growth of the commodity values ​​and spare parts used in the metro, it will become obvious that the increase of the subsidy amount is of a purely symbolic nature.
 74 ECONOMICS 2014 The small increase in the subsidy is conditioned by the amount of the grant provided to the metro in the same year.
 An important issue for the financing of the metro is the expenses of the company.
  The rules of technical operation of the metro and other departmental normative acts specifically define the requirements for the technical condition of line economy, communication and power supply systems, escalators, electric trains and other equipment, the observance of which only guarantees the safe and uninterrupted operation of this type of transport.
 The structure of the total operating costs of the metro is presented below. Figure 2. The structure of the total operating costs of the Yerevan metro in 2014. (Compiled according to the data of the results of the work of the Yerevan Metro for 2005-2015) As we can see from Figure 2, the total operating costs for 2014 amounted to 4915.1 million drams or 406.2 million drams per 49 km line operated (4915.1 million / 12.1).
 For the metros of the CIS member states, the above-mentioned index is several times higher than the same index of the Yerevan metro (see Table 1).
  It is clear from Table 1 that the operating cost of the Yerevan metro is the lowest.
  It is even 3.5 and 2.2 times lower than the same index of Yekaterinburg and 75 ECONOMICS of Samara metros, respectively.
  This ratio speaks for itself about the current state of financing of the Yerevan metro and the need to significantly review it.
 Table 1 Structure of operating costs of metros in a number of cities of CIS member states in 2013 (Russian ruble) (Compiled according to Metro International Metro Production and Economic Indicators 2013 data, January 30, 2014, pp. 1-9) Cities Yerevan Samara Nizhny Novgorod Yekaterinburg Novosibirsk 1 km line Dividend Coefficient The cost of the Yerevan Railway Metro (Million RUB) Costs (million rubles) (km) (Million RUB) Maintenance of the rolling stock, line economy, power supply, communication, drainage and other systems, current and overhaul Proper implementation is the most important precondition for security and smooth operation.
  At the same time, as evidenced by the results of analyzes conducted in this area over the past few years, the metro overhaul program is constantly under-executed due to lack of funds.
 In particular, in 2004-2005. For the respective 133.7 million and 137.0 million drams provided for the implementation of the capital repair programs, due to the lack of financial means 76 ECONOMICS, 117.3 million and 93.3 million drams respectively were actually done and in two years the total under-execution of the plan was more than 28%.
  This is in the case when the program envisages only a small part of the issues that need to be solved as soon as possible.
  In 2008, the state allocated 129.7 million drams to the metro for current repairs.
  However, given that most of the subway cars are over 25 years old, as well as the market prices of machinery and equipment tend to increase, it becomes clear that this amount is small and the continuation of renovation work at such rates and volumes will inevitably lead to further technical malfunctions. increase and may threaten traffic safety.
  According to the reconstruction program of Yerevan metro in 2010 The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development has provided a loan to the metro.
  Within the framework of the agreement between Armenia and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the borrower undertakes to change the rolling stock, improve the lines, as well as install pumps for drainage from the tunnels.
  The reconstruction program of the Yerevan metro consisted of 2 stages.
  The project cost about € 15 million, of which € 5 million was provided by the EBRD, € 5 million by the European Investment Bank and € 5 million by the European Commission.
 As a result of the project, 60 extremely worn-out wagons of wagons were replaced with new ones, supply and installation of 6 kV new cables and 17 new rectifiers with 36.4 km long high-voltage cable system, supply and installation of 76 new deep and sewer pumps, repair and modernization of 14 wagons.
 Among the general operating expenses of the metro, the company's salary fund is important, which in 2014 accounted for more than 48.4% of total expenditures.
  The latter allows to provide the company's employees with 154 thousand. AMD average salary.
 77 ECONOMICS Thus, performing an analysis of revenues and expenditures, we record that the Yerevan metro in 2014 It registered a loss of 415 million drams, and the further operation of the metro in the current conditions of financing, in terms of security, contains a certain risk and the development and implementation of an effective financial and economic mechanism becomes a necessity.
 Taking into account the results of the analysis and the foreign experience of financing the metros, in order to improve the financial situation of the Yerevan metro and cover the damage, we offer: After the collapse of the USSR, the Yerevan metro was not considered part of a strategic plan, no government program was developed to raise funds and develop the metro as an alternative means of transportation, build new tunnels and connect the outskirts of Yerevan to the center.
  Therefore, taking into account the current situation in the public transport system of Yerevan, particularly land transport, take more seriously the issue of financing the metro, modernization (short-term) and construction of new lines and stations (long-term), including this area in government economic programs, except provided by the state. Subsidize foreign financing, taking into account the foreign experience of financing metros, on the principle of "the one who pollutes", in particular: To contribute to the metro from the amount of property tax levied on vehicles, as a result of which a number of problems of the metro will be solved, as well as the latter will be a basis for reducing the congestion of the streets and the level of air pollution in the future.
 It was considered more realistic to justify the amount of money based on the ratio of the number of passengers and the number of passengers transported by overground passenger transport (bus, trolleybus, minibus, passenger taxi, private light passenger car transport) to 78 ECONOMICS. Table 2 Passenger transportation by land and metro in Yerevan in 2009-2014 [2.3] million passengers Type of transport in 2009 2010 Land Transport * Metro Ratio 2011 2012 year. 2013 2014 Studying 2009-2014. Passenger transportation by land and subway, we notice that the ratio of the latter has fluctuated in the range of 6.5-8.6% over the years.
  Based on the mentioned study, we propose to allocate to the metro 7.5% of the amount collected from the property tax of vehicles (as an average of six-year indicators).
  For comparison, in a number of European countries there are taxes aimed at financing public transport, particularly the metro, which range from 5-10%.
 .
