Government-people, society relations are always important for the development of each country, state.
  And the stronger and more stable those relations are, the more success and progress the country can have.
  The course of world history is a testament to that, and the study of that experience and the lessons learned from it is as important as any, especially today, when the world is constantly evolving, moving from the old to the new and improving.
  In such a case, the countries that make it through reforms benefit.
 But, unfortunately, that transition does not always take place in calm, peaceful conditions.
  It is connected, among other circumstances, with the change of people's social consciousness, which is also a matter of generational change.
  By the way, each generation has its role in those changes, because without the preparation of the previous one, the new one cannot carry out those transformations without a basis, in an empty place.
  And the stronger and healthier the connection between the generations, the more difficult it is to pass from the old to the new, to put it mildly, no matter how much it is a matter of time and demand.
 At different times in history, they have been carried out through wars, revolutions and other shocks, conflicts, taking hundreds of thousands of lives.
 One of the important principles of government-people-society relations is that the authorities are more conservative than the people, because they have a lot to lose and to answer to the people.
  They are revolutionary before coming to power, and after coming to power their main concern is to stay in power at all costs, during which they resort to various steps, even violence, pressure, violation of human rights, banning public speaking 314 HISTORY, arrests and other means.
  In such a case, the authorities set aside and often forget to come to power with the support of the people and their promises to the people along the way.
 It is not difficult to assume that governing by these methods, violating the opportunities and rights of people to express themselves freely, widens the power-people-society gap and makes the issue of change of power an issue on the agenda.
  The problem here is how it should be implemented, which largely depends, first of all, on the traditions of the country and then also on how accurately the revolutionaries or transformers of the country assess the situation in the country, the mood of the people, which is a great art, skill , because every mistake, slip can have undesirable consequences.
  History is evidence of that.
  It is enough to remember that for centuries, millennia there has always been a struggle between the authorities and the people, who have always rebelled, rebelled against the authorities and sought to change their situation, live a dignified life, defend their rights.
  This phenomenon has always accompanied people, regardless of the system they lived in, and forced the authorities to take steps aimed at mitigating the big and small contradictions and differences in the government-people relations.
 To this end, governments have always developed various mechanisms regulating power-people relations, rules of life, adopting laws, acts (acts in the Armenian reality, Judicial Books, Modern Constitutions), etc.
 In the ancient world, especially in Rome, these relations were regulated in the "Founding" legal document, which was considered as a compromise between the monarchy and the landowners and individual cities [1, p. 19].
 315 HISTORY In the Armenian reality the relations between the government-society-people-church were regulated, defined in different kinds of meetings - ecclesiastical, secular, national, in which decisions important for the state, country, people were made.
 Presided over by Nerses the Great in 365 The convening of the Ashtishat Assembly in Armenia laid the foundation for the tradition of establishing official rules.
 In later centuries, similar congregations were convened to establish order.
 Gagik Harutyunyan, one of the researchers of these issues, rightly observes all this, considering all these as types of law-making activities, regulation of relations and definition of rules of conduct [1, pp. 50, 51, 53].
 In the following centuries, the Armenian people also made other similar decisions.
  It is enough to remember the Judgment Books written by Mkhitar Gosh, Smbat Gundstable, "The Glorious Trap" compiled by the Shahamiryans (Article 389), which was intended to define the procedure (three-year term) of the Armenian House (legislature), the form of elections, the rights of that body, etc. [1, pp. 97-101].
 Each of the above-mentioned documents, reminiscent of the Constitution, pursued one important goal: to regulate the state (government)-people-society relations, the rights and responsibilities of everyone in those relations.
  However, it should be noted that the above-mentioned issues became more important when humanity entered a new era, the era of capitalist relations, which made it more important and imperative to establish a new order of power-people relations, new rules.
  That goal was pursued in 1787. USA, 1791 France, Poland, 1866 Sweden, 1868 Luxembourg, 1874 Switzerland, 1901 Constitutions adopted by Australia and many other countries [1, pp. 34-111].
 By presenting all this, we wanted to show that at different times in history 316 HISTORY, by adopting such documents, laws, pursued one goal: to strengthen the country's stability, to form mutual trust in government-people relations, legitimate government, and to exercise power freely and fairly. through elections.
 And if we do not go deeper into different periods of history, then only during the two decades of the XX century and the XXI century our people have experienced several changes of power, which have radically changed the government-people-society relations.
  And if the changes of power at the beginning of the XX century are connected with the war and the revolutions that took place as a result and the formation of two Armenian states, then the changes at the end of the XX century and the beginning of the XXI century are connected with other circumstances and new changes in the consciousness of the Armenian people.
 The main reason for these changes was the crisis of the Soviet system, its lagging behind in the process of world development, the aggravation of power-people relations, the tendency of different peoples to leave the Soviet Union, the awakening of national self-consciousness, the desire to have their own state, free and public expression. It was a demand, the realization of such a desirable dream of self-government, and so on.
 In this sense, it is difficult to overestimate the great excitement that pervaded our people when Gorbachev's "reconstruction" of history began in the country, which in the Soviet Union began, which, among other consequences, highlighted the flaws of more than 70 years of Soviet history, people-government party but it also contributed to the world's outcry, its readiness to secede from the Soviet Union, and its readiness to build its own country, state.
  And it must be said that it was here that the people-government protests were manifested again, each of which had its own approach and position in solving the problems that arose in the country.
 If the ruling elite and the party elite supported the line of the Union, especially the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, its headquarters, the Politburo, to give new life, new thinking to the affairs of the country and be satisfied only with superficial, so-called cosmetic transformations. Especially the Armenians of Nagorno Karabakh stood up to correct the mistake made by the Soviet authorities and reunite with the motherland.
 This situation, in turn, became a unique struggle between the authorities and the people, where the real face of each side was very clear, the position, which is also from the sphere of power-people relations, where the Armenian people stood up to defend their rights, restore their independence and unite Artsakh with the motherland. .
 And it is in this issue that the contradictions and different approaches of the two sides in the people-government relations were manifested to a greater extent.
 Especially the party leadership of Soviet Armenia, its first figures - Karen Demirchyan, Suren Harutyunyan, Vladimir Movsisyan, Stepan Poghosyan and others - did not stand by the people and probably could not, no matter how deep inside, maybe they were also on the side of the people, which very quickly caused a rift between the people and the authorities.
  Here the people were very free in their thinking, unfettered and directed all the energy accumulated in them to the mistakes made by the Soviet authorities towards the Armenian people, to correct the unjust decisions and to restore the historical truth.
 Among those mistakes was first of all the issue of Nagorno Karabakh, which was unjustly given to Soviet Azerbaijan.
  And if in Nagorno-Karabakh in the government-people relations with regard to the Artsakh issue, perhaps everyone was thinking only 318 HISTORY, it was not the same in Soviet Armenia.
  Here the split in the people-government issue was obvious, which meant that if the leadership of the republic was in a position to unconditionally implement the decisions of the Politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union on Nagorno Karabakh, then the Armenian people, the Armenian society organizing its daily rallies, its organizers, members of the Karabakh Committee. They stood by the people and fought for the independence of Nagorno Karabakh and its unification with the motherland.
 Such a circumstance created a rather tense atmosphere in the republic.
  But in honor of the forces organizing the movement, the "Karabakh" committee and other participants in the struggle for independence, the daily rallies and marches in Yerevan and other cities of the republic were quite organized, which did not give an opportunity to apply to the authorities of the republic.
  In this matter, the Union Government pursued a much tougher, more violent policy, taking various steps, such as patrols, a state of emergency, and other restrictions and strict measures.
 But regardless of all that, the Armenian people did not lose their faith and fought to the end to make the independence of Artsakh and Armenia a reality.
  The unity of the new forces and the people who came to power in that struggle was still strong.
  Ultimately, the Armenian Third Republic was born at the request of the people, through the struggle of the people.
  It was the result of a united struggle, where there was a strong connection in the people-government relations, mutual trust and faith that the forces that came to power with the people's fist will will fulfill their promises to the people, which will contribute to the faster development of the country.
 But as often happens, the authorities do not always stay true to their promises, which again causes a new rift in the government-people relations.
  And if it is one of the phenomena accompanying the world history, one of the laws, then the "Karabakh" committee was not an exception, and sooner or later it had to leave power, giving way to the new forces.
  However, these changes did not lead to the creation of a harmonious atmosphere in the relations between the people and the new authorities, especially since the new authorities, led by Robert Kocharyan, deepened the gap in the power-people relations, especially when all this was added in 1999. The tragedy that took place in the National Assembly on October 27, 1945, in which a number of members of the Republic's team fell victim: the Prime Minister, the Speaker of the National Assembly, his deputies and a number of other deputies.
  The hitherto undisclosed crime deepened the gap in the people-government relations, which continued and had a continuous nature until 2008. The new tragedy of March 1, which this time killed 10 people and injured hundreds.
 Unfortunately, this tragedy has not been revealed yet, which coincides with the period of Robert Kocharyan-Serzh Sargsyan ou change of power, which left its deep and negative mark on Serzh Sargsyan's further ten years of rule, during which the people-government relations became more tense. Dissatisfaction and distrust of the new government seemed to accompany him during all the years of his rule.
 The main reason was to leave the above-mentioned questions unanswered, which filled the cup of the people's patience day by day, again making necessary the new change of power in the country, in the republic, which was called to reveal all that and pursue a policy in the interests of the people.
 Such a revolution took place in 2018. April-May, which took place with exceptional speed and in equally exceptional calm conditions, the creator, implementer of which was the people, whose moods were very well understood and 320 HISTORY was understood by those who prepared the revolution and especially its initiator and organizer, National Assembly deputy, Civil Contract. P) Nikol Pashinyan, the founder of the party, a member of the "Yelq" faction, the author of the "My Step" initiative, who in 2018, by the will of the people, by his compulsion. He was elected Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia in the National Assembly on May 8, 2006 and began to take steps to fulfill his promises to the people on the way to power, which is still not very tangible and visible.
  By the way, it is enough to make a mistake, step back from the promises made, the people, who today have changed incomparably and believe in their strength, will raise the issue of change of power again with the same force and will not wait and will not believe that the authorities will give them the people's demands.
  And this means that today the authorities can not do anything if the people do not support the steps taken by them.
  As for the question why our people support the country's authorities today, we think it is clear, because they believe in it.
  This is a very important factor and the authorities understand that very well, otherwise everything can change very quickly not in favor of the authorities, because the people have also changed and for a long time they are not the people of yesterday.
  He has also learned lessons from the past, has become more demanding and will no longer wait for the authorities to grant him his rights as a mercy.
  We think that this is one of the lessons of the past, figuratively speaking, of the lessons of history, which must be taken into account, otherwise history itself will force you to learn lessons, the price of which is quite high.
 The other issue is how long the authorities will be ready to listen to the people, listen to their voice and hand over power to the new forces, if it is a popular demand.
  By the way, this circumstance is an order of activity of democratic countries, which has been established for centuries and has been implemented for centuries, which does not violate trust and respect in power-people relations. 321 HISTORY and is carried out through a referendum, which ensures the transition of power from one power to another. , that the forces that lost power, learning from the past, can, which (by the way often happens) come to power again.
 Otherwise, the change of power in the country becomes a painful process, which leads to the aggravation of power-people relations, thus deepening the power-people contradictions, especially when the authorities resort to various pressures, violence and violence against the people, individual political forces. even arrests.
  In such conditions, the people go after the forces that inspire faith and speak out about these injustices and call on the people to fight against the authorities to restore their rights.
  Such a circumstance creates a new type of government-people relations.
  The forces that stand by the people and fight with them to protect the interests of the people and carry out the change of power win here.
 Another important circumstance that greatly affects the government-people relations is the elections of different scale, level in the country, whether their holding is fair or unfair, which can contribute to the formation of trust or distrust in the government.
  Unfortunately, during the more than a quarter of a century history of the republic, both the presidential and the National Assembly elections have almost always been marred by major irregularities, no matter how much international observers have observed them and declared that they do not meet international standards.
  The problem is that bribery, the existence of fake lists, the holding of double elections, the organization of so-called "carousels", the taking of people 's passport data, the use of polling station history, .
 It is not accidental that after each election the opposition has always raised the issue of the legitimacy of the republic, especially the president, which has willy-nilly affected his image and especially his international reputation.
  It is natural that this circumstance, in its turn, has greatly damaged the government-people relations.
  These relations were greatly influenced by the fact that the Constitutional Court of the Republic has never made a decision in favor of the people and, despite various complaints, has always supported the authorities, thus losing respect for both the Constitutional Court and the law and justice.
  It is also from the sphere of government-people relations, where the authorities have a lot to do.
  This refers to the new authorities formed in the republic today, which lay the foundation for the formation of a new type of government-people relations, which is a long process, but the beginning is promising.
  And it is promising because the new forces that came to power in the republic are still faithful to their promises to the people on the way to power, they check their every step in meetings with the people, which is from the sphere of public democracy.
 As inspiring as it is and a way to check what they have done with the people, it should be combined with representative democracy, which allows the country to discuss the issues and make decisions in the relevant legislatures, combining different opinions, views. The new National Assembly formed in December 2006 is almost one-party, no matter how many opposition or alternative forces they have declared - Prosperous Armenia and Enlightened Armenia.
 Let us not forget to emphasize that in the government-people relations, the individual is very important and valued, his 323 HISTORY activities, especially the just, loving and conscientious person-individual, as they say, the person who earns his living by his work, who is the leader of our nationwide struggle. He is an actor who should not be lost.
 And one of the main concerns of the authorities is the establishment of justice and the rule of law.
  The people are resolute and consistent in this issue.
 There is no doubt that the new authorities of the country are well aware of its importance, that is, one of the important conditions for their success is not to lose trust in the people-government relations.
 In this sense, we agree with sociologist Gevorg Poghosyan, who in his extensive work "Armenian society at the beginning of the 21st century" talking about state-society cooperation, relations, formation of civil society and other issues, rightly notes that the key to the problems facing Armenian society It is social cooperation, the creation of solidarity between different layers of society, especially the government and the people [2, p. 118].
 But we must also admit that if both the authorities and the people lose that achievement, both sides will find themselves in an unenviable situation, from which it will take much more effort and time.
 At the same time, the authorities must understand that the enthusiasm of the people is not inexhaustible, and that not all sections of society support all the steps of the government, so they must take measures that will gradually change the condition of the people.
  And the system of power and government must act in such a way that it does not suppress the diversity of views, positions and demands in the society, which will contribute to the agreement and social solidarity in the society, as Tigran Torosyan writes, [3, p. 118 ].
 324 HISTORY It remains to be optimistic and believe that the new forces that came to power in the republic will stick to their principles and promises and will do everything to further strengthen the government-people relationship, which will be an important factor in learning from the past and achieving new successes.
 .
