Introduction.
  After the "Velvet" revolution, Armenia entered the process of strengthening democratic values.
  The transformation of the internal political conflict is going from the intra-systemic to the intra-social one.
  At the same time, the socio-political expectations of the society, which registered a sharp increase as a result of the revolution, have slightly softened, but still maintain the decisive correspondence with the opportunities.
  The public perception of the difference between these two important criteria, which is relative deprivation, leads to post-revolutionary disappointment over time.
 Comparative deprivation is a social-psychological phenomenon.
  It is not static and can change depending on the political, economic, social and other processes taking place in the country.
  The intensity of comparative deprivation is the change in the perception of the difference between expectations and opportunities, which makes it possible to assess possible fluctuations in society's behavior.
 Civil society in Armenia has played a key role in bringing about change.
 The programs implemented by the formal structures, which were aimed at raising public awareness through education, social assistance, protection of human rights, etc., were combined with manifestations of civic activism.
  From the struggle for social problems (pension reforms, rising fares, Electric Yerevan, etc.) to consolidation and victory during the revolution, civic activism in Armenia has shown new manifestations of the practical will of the people, which have already been the basis for theoretical elaborations [ 3].
  Civil society has also developed itself, gaining the best opportunity to play an even more important role in a modernized Armenia based on democratic values.
 Youth is a driving force of civil society.
  In parallel with a number of other functions of civil society in the post-revolutionary reality, it is significant to be involved in the logic of transforming the socio-political conflict.
  The shift in the nature of the conflict to the internal one is characterized, first of all, by the sharp increase in the number of actors involved in the public policy process.
 331 POLITICS It is logical that as a result of the political generation that took place as a result of the revolution, the political socialization of the youth and the expansion of participation achieved significant results.
  Youth is the part of the society through which, in parallel with the transmission of intergenerational inheritance, in the context of a more effective prediction of an alternative future, it is possible to carry out a political transformation. "During the political socialization of the youth, it is necessary to educate the elite of the new generation ... [which] will pursue a security policy based on the natural modernization of the national identity" [5, p. 179].
 The youth in Armenia is traditionally actively involved in social and political life.
  The Jinishyan Foundation carries out the most important process of instilling civic values ​​among the youth.
  The main goal here - the promotion of the development of civil society - is supposed to be achieved through the following tasks: Ացնել To increase the knowledge and interests of the Armenian youth on the most important issues of the development of civil society, democracy and human rights;  To build communication and analytical thinking skills that will allow Armenian youth today and later in adulthood to participate more actively in the development of Armenian society. Adding values ​​to the education system and promoting the energy of Armenian youth for participatory teaching [1].
 The implementation of these tasks creates individuals who perceive democratic values, who later, by creating and engaging in many structures of civil society, are a new impetus for the implementation of their own functions in public and political life.
 From the point of view of the psychological recovery of the society, the most important phenomenon is the realization of the role of young people as their own actors 332 POLITICAL SCIENCE.
  Still in 2012 According to the data, 37% of the youth thought that non-governmental organizations were able to solve important problems [4, p. 170].
 Young people educated on the basis of democratic values, by self-realization through civil societies, later manifest themselves in political life.
  This happens as a result of the application of the civil society cooperation model in the Republic of Armenia, in which case: "The most informed and experienced representatives of non-governmental organizations are gradually involved in various circles of state power, territorial, local self-government ..." [2, pp. 8-9].
 During their future activities, these young people, observing the norms of public coexistence, instill a corresponding political culture.
  The process of political modernization of the society is thus closely correlated with the continuous involvement of young people with high civic self-awareness in civil society structures.
  This is a bilateral complementary process.
  This phenomenon, in the end, creates grounds for the peaceful transformation of the internal conflict, in the cases when there is a slight or sharp increase in the intensity of deprivation in the society.
 The basis for the increase in the intensity of relative deprivation in society.
  Turning socio-political events give rise to unfounded aspirations.
 The perception of the members of the society about their own opportunities is growing sharply.
  Moreover, the individual begins to consider his abilities closer to expectations (Figure 1).
 Nevertheless. "Expectations are more influenced by the immediate reality than the aspirations" [9], as a result of which, over time, the vast majority of society has a decrease in perception of opportunities.
  This phenomenon is an increase in the intensity of deprivation, which is typical of all post-revolutionary periods.
 333 POLITICS In Armenia, too, as a result of the "Velvet" revolution, there was a rapid increase in public perception of social expectations and opportunities.
 PERCEPTION OF EXPECTATIONS PERCEPTION OF OPPORTUNITIES Figure 1. Increased public perception of expectations and opportunities as a result of the revolution27.
 Then there is the phenomenon of frustration, in which the perception of opportunities declines sharply, while the perception of expectations, with inertial tendencies, is relatively stable or decreases very slowly (Figure 2).
  The intensity of comparative deprivation is increasing, which is fraught with an increase in the likelihood of internal conflict and aggression.
 Although the perception of opportunities in the Armenian society has not experienced a crisis decline at present, the ongoing processes suggest such a tendency [8].
  The unjustified flight of expectations and perceptions registered as a result of the events of 2018 will inevitably lead to a certain increase in the intensity of deprivation in the medium term.
  Key role in mitigating this growth The values ​​presented in the Charts are relative.
 334 POLITICAL SCIENCE can have formal structures of civil society and promotion of civic activism.
 PERCEPTION OF EXPECTATIONS PERCEPTION OF OPPORTUNITIES Figure 2. Increased intensity of relative deprivation in society as a result of post-revolutionary frustration.
 Civil society as a factor mitigating the growth of relative deprivation.
  Civil society enables different sections of the society to rationalize their own expectations and present their own interests in different spheres.
  More. Within the framework of its functions, civil society contributes to increasing the effectiveness of public policy institutionalization. "An active civil society usually balances distrust of politicians and alienation from political institutions" [7, p. 180].
  Inclusion in stakeholder reflections on the true picture of an individual's political expectations and opportunities has a stabilizing effect on the intensity of relative deprivation.
 335 POLITICS In the reality of the Republic of Armenia, the youth, as the main beneficiary of the continuous development of the activity of the civil society, in accordance with its expectations, being included in the sphere of individual-civil society-government relations, has a key influence in restraining the growth of relative deprivation.
  Through manifestations of civic activism, the youth unites and coordinates the most important issues of public concern, which are thus presented to the government.
  On the other hand, the formal structures of civil society, by carrying out their function of transmitting information, raise issues and contribute to their publicity.
  Thus, the government receives the main signals through the management of which the internal conflict can be transformed peacefully.
  However, this is possible only if there are appropriate institutional bases and traditions rooted in political culture to resolve the contradictions. "Regimes can minimize the support of adversaries and direct political dissatisfaction to constructive or at least neutral goals to the extent that they offer stable, effective institutional alternatives to violent conflict" [6, p. 353].
 Institutionalization of the settlement of political conflicts by the Armenian government through the promotion of civil society and the rooting of traditions are among the most important indicators of the political modernization of the state.
 The peaceful transformation of the internal conflict is the guarantee of the strengthening of the state through consolidation.
 Conclusion.
  As a result of the "Velvet" revolution, the development of democratic values ​​in the Republic of Armenia has created an opportunity to gather a new impetus of modernization through consolidation.
  At the same time, as a result of public frustrations, the share of aggression in internal conflict tends to increase, as the intensity of relative deprivation 336 POLITICS in turn increases.
  Civil society is the factor through which it is possible to rationalize the process of society's perception of opportunities and expectations, thus mitigating relative deprivation.
  Youth are the driving force of civil society, which means that the expansion of opportunities for continuing education and inclusion in civil society in line with democratic civic values ​​has a direct impact on reducing relative deprivation in society.
  Summing up the above, the following proposals are presented to the attention of the relevant bodies of the Republic of Armenia. 1. Continuously promote the processes of teaching the civic values ​​of the youth and the manifestations of civic activity through financial, organizational and other means.
 2. Include a subject containing knowledge about civil society in RA secondary educational institutions.
 3. Strengthen the indirect participation of formal civil society organizations in the governance process.
 4. Continuously reform and simplify the process of obtaining legal registration by interest groups and establishing formal civil society structures, as well as further maintenance.
 5. To include representatives of sectoral non-governmental organizations in the structure of the commissions and sub-commissions of the RA Public Council.
 .
