The creation and use of international media as a result of the information revolution has, in fact, made great progress, especially in the last decade.
  Dynamic processes of civil institutions of political and international governance, such as mediocrity, which is increasing its opportunities and pace of development, as a result of which international media outlets such as CNN, BBC, RT, CNBC, Al Jazeera, etc., can become more relevant today. They must not only have an impact on the processes of global democratization, but also have a certain role in changing countries - in social, political, economic and other transformative situations.
  However, the increasing volume and uncontrollability of information flows have increased the opportunity to influence the formation of public consciousness and public opinion on the most important issues necessary for the "client", pursuing certain political, economic and geopolitical goals.
 In this context, the revision of such a concept as "the influence of the international media on democracy" becomes especially urgent, which is one of the main mechanisms for influencing both individual and public consciousness.
  In recent years, in the field of international relations, one can see the concerns of various researchers that the media have expanded their capabilities to such an extent that they can even influence the diplomacy and foreign policy of the superpowers.
 It also refers to one of the most rapidly evolving industries in the modern world, Internet media, which is a key imperative for the development of a qualitatively new democracy {6, pp. 196-204}.
  By and large, the impact of these new, real-time media outlets is significant, if not compelling.
  Journalists, politicians, and scholars largely view the influence of the media on foreign or domestic policy as binding on 305 POLITICS.
  According to media, PR and international relations expert Steven Livingston, in terms of the influence of the international media on democracy, three points can be emphasized. 1) the mechanism for approving the political agenda, 2) preventing the achievement of the desired political goal, 3) accelerating political decision-making {1}.
  The essence of the first point is that the media themselves can dictate to the foreign and domestic departments of states and policy makers whose activities are important, to achieve any goal that is not in the national interest of that country (which should be protected and promoted by diplomats and politicians figures), but was formed under the influence of some media.
  This is a rather controversial point, which we will dwell on below.
  The other point is the accelerating influence of the media on policy and decision-making.
 If before there was enough time for politicians to make important decisions and make them, today the availability of information forces them to respond to the events as soon as possible.
  Former US Secretary of State James A. Baker says the following about the international media factor as an important means of promoting democratization. "What does that influence do? It forces politicians to take a political position.
  I have to formulate it very quickly, because I am in real time.
  You do not have time to weigh yourself.
  In addition, you have all the opportunities to make those decisions, and that is a great approach to the manifestation of democracy. "{2}.
  As for the negative factor of the international media, two ways of its manifestation can be distinguished.
  The first of these has an emotional impact on the internal and external masses of countries and societies, both overt and covert.
 The second relates to classified information, often of military significance.
  Both components are a great danger in dance 306 POLITICAL SCIENCE, but they are principled tools that create complete competition and formulate an agenda.
  The first is a mechanism of information-psychological influence, with all the ensuing consequences.
  On the other hand, being open to information for the international media and working in real time can cause problems.
  This is possible, for example, during an anti-terrorist operation, when the disclosure of operative data may fail the whole operation.
  The position of researchers who assume that foreign policy or certain diplomatic steps are entirely influenced by the international media is more radical in this issue.
  Thus, according to J. According to Baker, the international media has come to the conclusion that the fall of the former Yugoslavia and the war in the Balkans were a crisis.
 "And it was constantly covered on TV, thus forcing the Clinton administration to take certain steps.
 Such a thing (television attention), however, has not happened in Rwanda, where the situation was much worse than in the Balkans "{3}.
  Ջ. Baker concludes from this that the driving forces of foreign policy should not meet the international media.
  Although such an approach seems more than obvious, there are still many contradictions.
  Thus, Andrew Natsios, an official from the Bush administration who led the operation to help Somalia, disputes the influence of the international media on US foreign operations to promote and establish democracy.
  He believes that the international media, in the person of CNN and its influence, receives much more attention than it deserves as an explanation for the phenomena arising from the policy processes pursued by Washington aimed at "global democratization."
  The same Livingstone confirms that although the people of Somalia and Afghanistan were in great danger, only 12% of those who reported on Bosnia reached 307 POLITICAL STUDIES.
  It becomes obvious that the international media prepares the mass consciousness of the population for a certain political action, aiming not to cause resistance in the society and in the societies of different countries, moreover, alarm.
  In this regard, the statement of former US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton during the hearings of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee is remarkable, where she was explaining to the parliamentarians the results of 2012. The need to allocate $ 47 billion to the State Department for
  According to Clinton, the United States is losing the most important war of world opinion, and the media are still a powerful force for diplomacy, especially since they carry out a great mission in the field of global democratization.
  It is noteworthy that the international press also has its competition, no matter how subjective it is and no matter how much it stems from the national interests of this country.
  And he is convinced that such competition can contribute to the rise and development of democracy in developing and developed countries.
  Russian author I.A. According to Nikolaychuk, in the context of establishing the improvement of international media democracy in a fairly competitive environment, the main guarantee of real success is the mastery of the right media calculus and media culture, which can be achieved even with small financial resources [5, pp.165-168].
 However, it should also be noted that the reduction of expenses in the field of media forces to pay a heavy price when, for example, the BBC broadcast is reduced, but at the same time the Russian and Chinese information channels are expanded.
  Of particular interest in this context are media outlets such as Al Jazeera or the Latin American TeleSUR channel.
  The latter is called to become a counterbalance to CNN and BBC in the region.
  Al Jazeera, for its part, belongs to the Qatari ruling family and supports radical Islam.
  H. Clinton warned that the United States is losing the global race for world influence.
  Doubting the Secretary of State's 308 POLITICAL STATEMENTS ON REDUCTION, which also applies to NATO media, it should be noted, however, that his remarks confirm the second principle of international media democracy, which is that politics does not follow the media. On the contrary, for certain actors in international relations, the media become a promoter of geopolitical, economic and other interests.
  The role of new media is especially important in this context.
  On the one hand, they provide an opportunity to increase the impact, as no TV or radio channel, as well as periodicals, can claim to attract such a wide audience as today provides the international media world, social networks in the form of Facebook. or "Twitter", although without them, the diversity and multiplicity of international television already speaks of the rise of democracy.
 On the other hand, the exaggeration of information increases many times over, because there are means for its dissemination, and it is impossible to block it in the conditions of global democratization.
  In this context, it should be noted that in the field of information in Armenia there is the participation of foreign policy players, such as the US and Russian governments, the participation of TV and radio companies, as well as the activity of some online information sites {4}.
  In this regard, it can be confirmed that the participation of major international media players in our infotainment system, on the one hand, on international platforms can assure the Armenian democratization process and build a truly civil society, on the other hand, by creating real competitive conditions in the field, can provide ample opportunities. to raise the quality and level of democracy.
  This is also due to the fact that, for a long time, the activity of the media in the world is not limited to the borders of the given countries, but 309 values.
 .
