Change is the process of movement and interaction of phenomena, the formation of new features, connections, relationships and the elimination of the old.
 Changes in organizations can be in the basic structure, problems and activities, applied technology, management process, organizational functions, workforce management, effective work organization, etc.
 One of the main tasks of change management is to overcome resistance.
  It is self-evident that in 117 MANAGEMENT favorable working conditions and the most productive equipment, even the smartest cars are powerless to be used effectively without a man.
  The same goes for changes.
  Changes in human behavior should not be viewed as a mere derivative of organizational goals, technology, or structural changes. This mentality often leads to a deadlock for the leaders of the organization.
  The underestimation of the human factor has deep roots.
 Aristotle defined the main subject of labor, the slave, as a speaking instrument, distinguishing itself only from inanimate instruments and speechless animals.
  F. Taylor was repeating the same worldview mistake.
  Taylor ruled out the voluntary participation of workers in the reforms because, in his view, only through forced standardization of methods, the forced use of the best tools and working conditions, and forced co-operation could the overall pace of work be accelerated.
 At present, technocratic practices are also very common, both in governance in general and in the implementation of changes in particular.
  In modern societies, strikes, sabotage, various types of protests, manifestations of civil disobedience are the result of incomplete registration of people's attitudes towards changes in the whole society or its separate spheres, incomplete interpretation of changes, strategic and tactical omissions in their management.
 The main person responsible for the changes, however, is the leader, and he must be able to show will, consistency, demand, to ensure the implementation of the planned changes.
 In order to implement the organization's strategy, to understand change, it is necessary to find out why people 118 GOVERNANCE oppose change.
  Often, employees in organizations oppose change.
 One of the general reasons is the existence of a conservative mentality, which prevents us from seeing the need for innovation and even the benefit.
  The pattern of change, however overwhelming, is that most people still prefer the existing, the ordinary, the learned (often, the more advanced this or that project is, the harder it is to overcome the anchored resistance to conservatism).
 Reasons for resisting change can vary, but the most common are conservative thinking, uncertainty about the future, self-interest, lack of understanding and trust, and different assessments and goals.
  It is necessary to find out the specific reason for opposing the changes and take appropriate measures.
 History has shown that many of the most egregious reforms have failed because of ideological vulnerabilities.
  Without this voluntary change (especially the change that covers the whole system), theoretical-worldview understanding, substantiation of goals and means, convincing clarification of the desired perspective, this change cannot be effective and harmonious.
  Ideological substantiation significantly reduces the existing and expected social tension and, even when used skillfully, creates a unique counter-movement, a willingness to make changes.
  People's ideological conviction, inner drive, confidence and enthusiasm are powerful tools for change.
  And the end result of every change is largely due to how people perceive that change, how they want to see it, and how much effort and energy they put into making it happen.
 GOVERNANCE Another reason to resist change is the uncertainty of the future.
  Uncertainty is the lack of information about future events, the fear of the unknown.
  Uncertainty is especially negatively perceived by employees who are highly sensitive to change, afraid of anything new and unusual.
  They are not sure about the positive nature of the changes. Can they meet the requirements of the new procedure or technology?
 Every change contains uncertainty, because the implementation of change always, along with the realization of the original goal, also leads to unpredictable (and even fundamentally unpredictable) consequences in the initial stage.
  This is the inviolable law of every progress.
  The reformers begin the process of change, seeing the certainty of the future and striving to implement it, while the protesters emphasize the uncertainty, exaggerating its significance in the whole scope of change.
  In this situation, the person is generally satisfied, he feels relatively safe, but the breath of change is already able to bring the need for security to the forefront, and the person judges based on the concern of satisfying that need first of all.
  As a result, conservatism, uncertainty, anxiety form a monetary cause - distrust of change.
 People often justify their negative attitude towards change, in particular, they try to convince themselves and others that the changes will do more harm than good, that there is no need to change anything at all, and so on.
  And it does not remain only in the form of a negative, but inactive position, but it is also manifested in the form of certain opposition actions.
  This was the case during the spread of the scientific management experience, when not only the workers and the trade unions but also the capitalists themselves opposed Taylor's innovative formulations.
  Taylor repeatedly emphasizes that the success of scientific management implies a "complete revolution of mentality" not only in managers but also in those governed, and that this mutual readiness is a prerequisite for radical change in scientific management. The company's management often skeptically accepts innovative team proposals and they have to be approved [12].
  It is also possible that managers and employees who are not involved in the innovation process like this layout.
  If employees have good reason to resist change, managers should try to understand it, which will greatly facilitate the innovation process.
 An important reason to resist change is self-interest.
  Employees 'resistance to change is often explained by employees' belief that proposed changes in technology or structures will negatively affect their position (waste of power, loss of company profits or own pay).
  Fear of self-loss may be the most serious obstacle in the way of organizational change.
 Another reason to resist change is a lack of understanding and trust.
  Workers are unlikely to believe in the effective proposals of the proponents of change if they do not understand the main goals of reconstruction and reform.
  Resistance arises when employees have a negative experience of interacting with innovators.
  The CEO of one of the American companies had a habit of radically changing the financial reporting system every year.
  After another change, the employees refused to follow his instructions because they did not trust the manager and his intentions.
 One of the reasons for resisting change is the differentiated assessments of the situation and the different goals.
  P 121 MANAGEMENT Resistance to change may be due to the fact that the company's employees assess the current situation differently than the proponents of the idea.
  Serious arguments are brought against the proposed changes.
  Heads of different departments have different goals, and the introduction of innovation often reduces the likelihood of achieving them.
  For example, the decision to start the production of a new necessary consumer product will inevitably lead to additional costs, against which the head of the production department will speak very sharply.
  On the other hand, resistance will draw attention to issues related to innovation.
  From the employees' point of view, the reasons for the discomfort of the changes are understandable.
  In this situation, the leader is required not to ignore the resistance, but to find out the reasons for it and develop a strategy to win over the opponents of change, which includes two main approaches: analysis of the force field and tactics of overcoming the resistance.
 There are no universal rules for overcoming change.
  Many leaders do not take into account how individuals and teams will react to change.
  Or what positive impact the changes will have on those people.
  However, there are general methods for overcoming resistance to change.
 The most common way to overcome resistance is to inform people in advance about the expected changes.
  If people are informed, they also feel the need for change.
  The information process can be face-to-face dialogue, team workshops and reports.
  In practice, higher-level leaders start a dialogue with lower-level leaders.
  Sometimes such seminars can take months.
  This program requires a lot of time and work, especially when a large number of people are involved in this business.
  When direct participants in the change process and other resistance forces require large amounts of information about reorganization, managers turn to communications and training programs.
 The latter are more important in cases where the introduction of change implies the use of new technical knowledge by employees or users are not familiar with the idea of ​​reorganization.
 When opponents are involved in the strategic planning process, they often avoid resistance, ie participation implies the involvement of users and potential opponents in the change implementation process.
  When making strategic changes, their initiators take into account the opinions of employees and use their advice.
  Many managers take staff involvement very seriously in implementing the strategy.
  Sometimes it leads to a positive result, sometimes to a negative one.
  Some managers think that employee participation in the process is a must, while others think that it is a mistake.
  Both of these forms lead to a number of problems for leaders, as neither point of view is ideal.
  Employee support is provided in the following way: they are given free time to learn new skills, their opinion is heard, they receive emotional support.
  Help and support are especially needed when resistance is based on fear and anxiety.
  However, the disadvantage of this approach is that it requires a large amount of time, therefore it is an expensive process and yet often leads to failure.
  And if you do not have the necessary money, time and patience, it means that the use of support methods is meaningless.
  The participation of the staff in the changes enables the manager to promptly identify 123 MANAGEMENT to identify possible problems, to realize the differences and perception of the changes.
 One of the ways to fight against the resistance is that active or potential opponents of the resistance receive various stimulants.
  For example, the manager may offer the employee a high salary, instead he may change the job assignment.
  Negotiations take place when it is clear that someone is losing as a result of the change and that is why he is showing strong resistance.
  During the negotiations a deal is concluded and the parties agree on the acceptance and approval of the desired change.
  In order to overcome the resistance, it is necessary to reach an agreement between the two parties, although this method can be very expensive.
  In some cases, leaders try various tricks to hide their true intentions.
  Then people may think that they are being deceived, which will lead to their negative opinion and, in addition, the leader will gain a bad reputation.
 Leaders often try to overcome resistance by force.
  They usually force employees to come to terms with strategic changes through covert or overt threats (intimidation, dismissal, dismissal, etc.).
  The method of threatening is risky, because people resist the changes.
  There are situations when it is necessary to apply changes very quickly, in which case, regardless of everything, the coercive method becomes the only one for the manager.
 In fact, it can be concluded that the changes will be effective and will not be resisted by employees if employees are informed.
  Indeed, people often oppose change because of ignorance or surprise.
  When the staff is aware of the change to be made, the employees are explained in detail its essence, necessity, and scope of management. They easily accept the change and contribute to the change through their work.
  Changes are also effective when employees get acquainted with the changes through negotiations, joint discussions, their opinion, suggestions, justifications are heard, and not just informed about what is going to happen.
  Employees should not only be involved in planning, organizing, and overseeing change, but also receive some moral and material encouragement from management.
 .
