One of the most serious problems from the point of view of economic security is the aging of science.
  In particular, the number of scientists over the age of 65 is equal to 25% of the total.
  That number is declining year by year, not because these people are leaving science, but because they are dying.
  In ten years there will be no generation of the Soviet Union.
  This number is worrying, as there are few scientists in Armenia in 79 GOVERNMENT, scientists aged 35-50, and in a few years there will be a serious shortage of scientists.
  In order to overcome the problem and fill the gap, a number of programs must be implemented in the coming years.
  Among them is the increase of the efficiency of science financing, the creation of modern conditions for young scientists to live and work in Armenia.
  In addition, it is necessary to involve Armenian scientists abroad in development programs, to establish centers of scientific, educational and scientific-technological excellence in the field of some breakthrough technologies, to strengthen the link between education and science, to introduce funding mechanisms based on efficiency in education. [1] .
 Problems related to science are not properly reflected in the program of activities of the Government of the Republic of Armenia.
  The intellectual threat - "brain drain", the erosion of scientific potential (qualitative changes in the system of science and education, materialization of science, incentives for scientific activity) are completely ignored [3].
 Although high technologies are considered a priority sector and are designed to enhance the competitiveness of the entire economy, and in recent years the country has seen some progress in various international reports, Armenia has not yet registered a significant positive change.
  In particular, in 2018. In the World Competitiveness Report, Armenia ranks 33rd among 140 countries in terms of innovations.
  The best score was registered for the pillar of healthcare (83 points out of 100).
  The worst results by place and unit were recorded in market-sized pillars.
 As for the factors hindering the development of knowledge-based economy, in general, the lack of a favorable environment for the acquisition and dissemination of knowledge, the presence of backward technologies in a number of sub-industries, the need for incentives to pursue scientific work field, the existence of economic monopolies and oligopolies, etc.
  There is a problem of intellectual security.
 One of the main obstacles to the effective realization of the intellectual potential of our country in the local and international markets is the general aging of the scientific staff, and the elimination of all scientific schools in some areas.
 Many scientists are paid less than the minimum wage.
  Studies show that at present there are about four to five thousand scientists working in different fields in Armenia, which is almost twice the quantitative index of the Soviet years.
 Insufficient funding of science by the state is mainly considered as an obstacle to development, which is only one side of the problem, as it is important not only the amount of allocated funds, but also how, by whom and on what mechanisms it is implemented.
  Currently, according to the Ministry of Education and Science, about 80% of the funds allocated to science from the RA state budget are allocated to basic research and only 20% to applied-oriented developments.
  In the United States, for example, 16% of funding is spent on basic research, 26-28% on applied research, and 65% on design and technology development.
 In this sense, a significant step can be taken to bring technological innovation to the forefront and to guarantee preferential terms to all companies that will create new products and services, which, in turn, will be competitive in both domestic and foreign markets.
 In return for the programs developed on the basis of innovative and high-tech, the state first of all promises rather heavy tax privileges (to exempt 81 GOVERNMENT from profit tax for 3-4 years, to postpone the payment of value added tax, etc.).
 In the field of science, there is an influx of staff to other sectors of the economy.
  This problem can lead to serious difficulties in the development of science.
  The volumes of science financing in the Republic of Armenia are decreasing.
  In particular, in 2019, the share of research and development expenditures in Armenia was reduced to 0.25% of GDP.
  For comparison, in 2016, budget funding for science amounted to 0.27% of GDP.
  It is difficult to find another country that has so little support for science.
  Moreover, the State Committee of Science of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Armenia provides budget funding to 82 organizations, 33 of which are members of the National Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Armenia.
  The rest are universities, branch institutes, etc.
  There are many scientific organizations in Armenia, but there is little money 1 [6].
  As for employment in science, it has been reduced by 840 employees.
  Six times more is given to the police than to science.
 In some cases, the scientific results are not competitive in the global innovation market.
  The latter has its objective and subjective reasons, the fact that there is no developed infrastructure for scientific research, leads to a decline in the competitiveness of scientific results.
 At present, there are almost no production giants in our country, around which scientific-production associations can be formed, which can contribute to the improvement of the production process.
  The current export policy of Armenia lacks the component of creating and exporting value added at the expense of science, there are no infrastructures for financing the commercialization of scientific results.
 In 2019, scientific expenses in Armenia will be reduced.
 82 MANAGEMENT They were planned until 2020, which has not been done so far.
 In the current situation, it is important to clarify the vision of science development, on which the development strategy of the field should be built.
  In our opinion, the vision of the development of the field of science is to make the Republic of Armenia a country with a knowledge-based economy, a competitive country in the European scientific-technical area at the level of basic and applied scientific researches and developments.
 The realization of this vision requires:  Develop a system to ensure the sustainable development of science and advanced technologies;  Modernize the logistics and infrastructure of science;  Ensure sustainable growth in the number of highly qualified personnel in science and technology;  Ensure an influx of young people into science; Generation change, ել Ensure effective state sponsorship and development of basic scientific research, ուղղված Promote research on the acquisition of knowledge used in economics in scientific organizations, increase innovations and patents, ավորել Develop science,
  In particular, the development of science requires new reforms of the institutional system.
  The National Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Armenia, as well as all research institutes are important for its operational role. There are such institutions in a number of ministries, which, being divided, act as independent and weak links, that is, the idea of ​​consolidation is pushed to the forefront.
 According to the NSS, there are about 35 organizations carrying out scientific and technical work under the RA Ministries [7].
  The inclusion of at least a part of them in the RA National Academy of Sciences can be considered as a direction to increase the efficiency of their activities.
  As a result, the necessary research for this or that ministry should be carried out in the research institutes that are part of the Academy (already united).
  This, on the one hand, will force the ministries to cooperate closely with scientific research institutes, and on the other hand, the results of scientific research will be translated into the policy implemented by the ministries.
  The total number of research institutes has a tendency to decrease, and in 2005 At present, almost half of the 102 existing institutes remain in practice.
  This trend is due to the financial resources allocated to individual research institutes, as well as the productivity of staff and their work, which is more expedient to regulate centrally.
 One of the problems of science in Armenia is also the almost absence or asymmetry of the territorial distribution of science.
  The main problem here is that certain regions are not involved in research.
 The latter leads to the fact that there are simply no schools for the training of scientific staff in the regions, and on the other hand, it leads to the internal migration of the scientific staff from the government to Yerevan.
  There is almost no program or support for the development of science in the regions.
  2017 As of today, only 10 out of 72 organizations carrying out scientific and technical works are in the regions.
  Three organizations operated in Kotayk and Aragatsotn marzes, two in Shirak and one each in Ararat and Armavir.
 The other regions do not have research institutes.
 In this regard, the state policy should also target the development of science in the regions, as the policy of balanced territorial development should be based on the issue of balanced territorial development of science.
  On the other hand, the fact that the development of science in the regions cannot be an end in itself and must be conditioned by the peculiarities of the sectoral development of the economy must be taken into account.
  Thus, for example, in Syunik a research institute for the development of modern mechanisms for the extraction of minerals and metals may be established, in Gegharkunik - for obtaining new varieties of agricultural crops, fish farming, etc.
  And on the basis of those research centers, in the future it is already possible to implement the program of having a technopark in each region, which will create opportunities for development on the basis of innovation for the respective region.
 The formation of scientific industrial clusters in Armenia should start with institutional reforms [2], forming the system of structures that should be engaged in the development, implementation of scientific policy and be responsible for the development of science.
  The institutional system must also be provided with the entire legal basis on which the science system must be built and operate.
  It is necessary to create a unified system of interconnected scientific organizations and manage them from a single center, eliminating all grounds for fragmentation, as well as to ensure decentralization of science by establishing regional research centers in 85 GOVERNMENT regions.
 It is also important to create a whole system of connecting structures between scientific institutions and enterprises carrying out production activities, and around the latter also to complete the missing elements for the formation of scientific clusters.
 The development of science is based on the problem of unification of science, setting priorities and priorities for the development of science.
  The development of science implies the need for managers (managers) endowed with the skills of management in the field of science, which will be a serious impetus for attracting financial resources and providing them to more competitive research teams.
 The main priorities for the development of science are the increase of financial resources in the field and the organizational reforms of the system.
  In particular, in the field of science, the program aims to increase the funds allocated to science and bring the scientist's salary to the average salary.
  And the share of products and services based on science and high technologies in the total GDP of the country should become predominant within 10-15 years, against the current 0.25%.
 One of the primary links for the development of science in Armenia is the formation of developed infrastructure necessary for scientific activity. Developed research laboratories, innovation centers, technoparks can implement a number of programs, as well as be a platform where reputable specialists will be involved, joint scientific programs will be implemented.
  Such centers require investments, which also implies some support from the state.
 The development of consortium programs in collaboration with leading research organizations should be addressed through two approaches. First of all, it is necessary to establish centers dealing with such programs, as well as to attract staff, which 86 GOVERNMENT have sufficient capacity to implement such programs, make applications and implement international cooperation.
  In this case, the potential of the Diaspora and Armenian scientists can be fully united.
 There is a need to create a structure implementing a policy of scientific and technological progress and innovation development in the country, which will coordinate the activities of scientific institutions, which will also contribute to the commercialization of scientific research results, attract venture funds, technoparks, etc.
  The authority to ensure the innovative development of the economy can be delegated to such a structure, assuming responsibility for science-production relations and cooperation, accordingly, for innovative development and international competitiveness of products.
 The effective development of modern science and technology requires more advanced access opportunities for scientists and all stakeholders in terms of access to information sources published by scientific circles.
  In the field of modern science and technology, it is important to emphasize the importance of the processes of shared use and dissemination of knowledge and information.
  Each university should have an information system in which data on scientific projects implemented in those teams will be stored.
  The database of such systems includes information that is the result of the work of scientific teams directly connected with that system.
  At the same time, the systems of library organizations make it possible to store information about scientific articles, persons, thematic catalogs of a certain field.
  It is also necessary to automate the accumulation of information from different sources, which implies the integration of data into the information systems of scientific research.
 87 GOVERNANCE Science-economy connection It is necessary to promote the restoration of the broken ties in science and production. The primary goal of any manufacturing enterprise should be innovations that can contribute to new levels of development.
  In this sense, the registration of new brands, new results, as well as the licensing of new scientific discoveries and the implementation of commercialization policies around them are of great importance.
 The formation of an effective and innovative innovation system is important for the development of the knowledge-based economy in the country.
  There is also a need for some clarifications, as well as mechanisms that indicate what funds can be attracted to finance innovations, or to what extent, and so on.
 It is important to organize modern productions in Armenia, which, in turn, will increase the competitiveness of the created scientific results.
  The formation of centers for the commercialization of scientific results is also important.
  These centers have to specialize in two issues, that is, to clarify what the producers need, and on the other hand, to present those criteria to the scientists, and at the end to perform mediation service and ensure the commercialization of the created results.
 The innovative activity of SMEs will be stimulated in every way.
  At the same time, the diversification policy of locomotive and priority branches (clusters) of production is important, ie the establishment of clusters on the basis of science, where there is scientific potential, developing that field.
 On the other hand, it is necessary to stimulate the production activity of SMEs, as the trade sector accounts for more than ten percent of Armenia's GDP, which testifies to the commercial dominance of SMEs.
 GOVERNANCE Systematic reforms in the field of intellectual property management should be aimed at protecting the results of intellectual activity and implementing them more effectively in Armenia and abroad with the aim of improving the legislative framework, training of national staff, regular research on inventory activity, the creation of a computer system and the creation of adequate infrastructure.
 As the state sponsorship of science tends to decrease, it is necessary to orientate decisively towards foreign orders, to develop a comprehensive program to penetrate the international market of intellectual potential.
  In the domestic life it is necessary to make the tax policy one of the pillars of maintaining the intellectual and educational potential of the country.
  Tax incentives should become an effective way to maintain and strengthen the native intellectual potential.
  For example, U.S. tax law 171a allows individuals and firms to deduct from taxable income those investments that are intended to finance the activities of education and research institutions.
  State income tax does not tax the income of those scientific and educational institutions that are used for public benefit.
  Tax benefits will be given to the structures that will provide practical assistance to science.
 .
