The study of the history of wars, conflicts, various kinds of conflicts, clashes has always been 576 HISTORY and is probably still an important topic for scholars of all kinds, because wars, conflicts, clashes, unfortunately, have always accompanied and still accompany human society, causing enormous Material and human losses, destructions, thus hindering its normal development, disrupting the realization of the creative mission given to it by nature.
  Therefore, it was not accidental that research, studies, issues of political solution to these problems, conflicts, wars and their resolution have been and still are considered an important field, an important task for many researchers, because without a scientific study of their history, possible It is not to see what means and tricks are needed to solve this difficult problem facing mankind and to do everything to achieve harmony and peace.
 Therefore, it is not accidental that there is a lot of scientific literature and studies on the topic under discussion, which is understandable and natural, because, as we said, humanity deals with this phenomenon almost every day.
 These studies discuss and analyze issues such as the objective and subjective causes of wars, conflicts, conflicts, their settlement mechanisms, ways of establishing peace, opportunities and means.
 Of particular importance among the major works on the topic under discussion is the extensive work Conflict [1] by editors Sandra Chaldellin, Daniel Drakman, and Larissa Fast, in which the authors analyze issues such as the types of conflicts and the impact on conflicts. factors of different order, nature, their manifestations, ways and possibilities of solution.
 577 HISTORY One of the most important merits of the work is that the authors were not satisfied with merely presenting the number, history, causes and other factors of the conflicts, but also tried to provide opportunities for resolving them, from negotiations to various kinds of mediations and other kinds of efforts. To achieve peace, reconciliation, which, unfortunately, are still very much in the present world.
 Also of interest is Conflict Studies, Gender, and Peacebuilding, [2] published by the United Nations Women's Development Fund.
 Issues such as the main concepts of conflict in sociology and psychology, typology of conflict, features of its types, structure, dynamics, gender culture of society, patriarchy as a dominant model of modern society, the main strategy of women in the concept of reconciliation, components, etc.
 Well-known political scientist Francis Fukuyama approaches the same issues from other positions. He published the article "The End of Stories" in the "National Interest" magazine, and then, based on the ideas and questions put forward in it, published an even more extensive work, "The End of Stories and the Last Man", which has long been known to the world community.
  [3] In it he presents especially the issues of war and peace of the 20th century, the uncompromising struggle against different systems, ideologies, countless wars, etc.
 However, the main task of the author leads to one main goal - to show that after the end of the Cold War, the Berlin Wall, the collapse of the socialist system, there was a movement of redistribution and change in the world that the world has never seen.
  In saying this, he is holding or cherishing the idea that humanity has entered a new era, an era of peace and stability.
 578 HISTORY However, further historical events have shown that such a conclusion and expectations are not very feasible, as a new period of conflict began after the change of balance of power, the analysis of which is dedicated to the 1993 work of the famous American geopolitician Samuel Huntington. The study "The Clash of Civilizations" published by him, in which he puts forward the idea that now humanity is faced with the problem of the clash of civilizations, which is quite a threat to the normal and peaceful development of mankind.
  [4, pp.33-46], [pages 5,12-19] It is enough to mention, - Huntington writes, -1990s. Dozens of conflicts, wars and clashes of different scales were already taking place in a number of countries of the world.
 For example, in 1989 There were 36 conflicts in 32 regions of the world in 1995. 30 armed conflicts in 25 countries of the world, 27 conflicts in 1999, etc.
  [6, p.187] Unfortunately, this tendency still continues today, no matter how much efforts are made by international organizations, from the UN to other organizations, to settle them, to resolve them through political means.
 Let us also say that there are a lot of studies on such issues in the Armenian scientific circles, which is understandable, because the Armenian people have also clashed over the centuries and, unfortunately, still face the unresolved, or rather unfairly resolved, various categories of the past. with questions.
  Therefore, it is not difficult to assume that Armenian authors, researchers have done and still do various studies to show the conflicts, the threats that our people face every day and do everything to bring the existing conflicts imposed on us by the outside world to our people. solve the threatening dangers in a preventable and political way.
 Among those researches, Hayk S. stands out. The studies conducted by Kotanjyan.
 [7] [8] In his interesting and large-scale works, the author has worked on issues of vital importance to all Armenians, such as the security of our country, all Armenians, its sustainable development, and the just solution of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
 Hayk S. Kotanjyan's works are written on the basis of huge factual materials, and the comments are made from the approaches and principles accepted on an international scale.
 Also interesting is "Azerbaijan against the people of Karabakh" published by M. Aghajanyan, E. Asatryan, S. Minasyan. The Legal and Political Consequences of Aggression and Their Impact on Regional Security Perspectives ”[9], in which the authors presented the historical truth about Nagorno-Karabakh (Artsakh) to a wide range of readers based on rich and reliable facts and also showed that the Soviet authorities in 1921 made unjust decisions. On March 16, 1921, Nakhichevan and Nagorno-Karabakh, the historical Armenian territories of Moscow (October 13, 1945 in Kars, and the Caucasus Bureau on July 5) were given to the Soviet Republic of Azerbaijan for political reasons, with which the Armenian people, Artsakh, could not reconcile. Sooner or later it should have led to the struggle of the Armenian people for liberation and independence.
 Without going into the details of the study conducted by the authors, the authors presented to the world and the world community the decades-long anti-Armenian policy, ethnic cleansing, genocidal actions, etc., pursued by the Azerbaijani authorities against the Armenian people, and still have one goal: to eliminate the Armenian element. to the Armenian people and to appropriate its territories, to implement the policy of Pan-Turkism, which has been developed for a long time and is manifested more openly today.
  In carrying out such useful research work, the authors pursued another humanitarian goal: to present the work to various UN, OSCE, NATO, CIS, EU structures, all those involved in the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh (Artsakh) conflict 580 HISTORY to do everything possible to fulfill the internationally renowned mission of resolving the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict through political means.
 Of course, such work, the proposals made in it, are extremely useful not only to attract the attention of the Armenian people, the world community from the point of view of the settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, but also to abandon the double standards often used to resolve many and countless similar conflicts. An internationally accepted policy based on the same principles, which also has a desire to draw useful from history.
 Tigran Torsyan's extremely useful and interesting monograph "The settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict within the framework of international law" also refers to the issues of conflict settlement.
 [10] And as much as the author devoted his work to the history of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, it also gave a separate and important place to the international legal basis for conflict resolution, its settlement issues, the activities of international non-governmental organizations, and comparative analysis of conflicts. The conflicts in Kosovo, the application of a double standard in the Kosovo issue, etc.
 Tigran Torosyan discussed the same issues in another work, "The South Caucasus after the August war.
  The Nagorno Karabakh conflict, Armenian-Turkish relations ".
  [11] Equally interesting is the large-scale work of Henrik Abrahamyan, one of the co-authors of this article, "Socio-political preconditions for the independence of Armenia and the beginning of its establishment (February 1956-September 1991)".
 [12] 581 HISTORY The history of the Artsakh movement, its objective causes, ways of resolving the conflict, international reactions of the world community and other details of the struggle for independence, etc. were thoroughly discussed in the work.
 The work is written on the basis of many archival materials, documents and is extremely useful for those involved in conflict resolution and the general public.
 Among the works on the discussed topic, Armen Sargsyan's “Armenophobia in Azerbaijan. At the Crossroads of Resentment and Authoritarianism ”[13] where the author based on many facts presented the anti-Armenian policy of the Azerbaijani authorities, the bases, causes, heredity of that policy, especially the state bases of anti-Armenianism, from various methods of propaganda to education. The daily policy, the propaganda of hatred towards Armenians, to form the image of an enemy.
 Also interesting is the work of Hayk Demoyan, "The Karabakh Conflict and the Turkic Factor", which is rich in factual materials, where the author showed how Turkey has been in Azerbaijan for decades, regardless of whether it is Musavat, Soviet or post-Soviet, with far-reaching goals. Turkey has always provided all kinds of assistance to Azerbaijan to pursue an anti-Armenian, anti-Armenian policy, the goal of which is the policy of cleansing Azerbaijan of Armenians, depriving them of Armenians, and eliminating them from Armenians, which is more openly manifested today.
  The author confirms all his conclusions on the basis of rich factual materials.
 It is dedicated to the history of the issues of the Artsakh problem and the analysis of the issues of the ways of solution Suren Zolyan's "Nagorno Karabakh.
  Problems and Conflicts ".
  [14] 582 HISTORY Author: Doctor of Philological Sciences, Professor, 1990-1995. Member of the Supreme Council (National Assembly) of the Republic of Armenia, Secretary of the Special Commission on Nagorno Karabakh, member of the Armenian delegation formed to resolve the issue Suren Zolyan, who knew all the details of the issue very well, presented the readers with remarkable, rich archival facts. A work based on the causes of the Artsakh movement, enabling the reader to gain a deeper understanding of the real history of the issue and draw the right conclusions.
 The work of the well-known orientalist, historian Nikolay Hovhannisyan "Conflict: Stages, Submissions, Various Solutions" is also interesting.
  [15] The need to write such a work by the author is due to the fact that he in 1995. He was invited by the Center for International Development and Conflict Management at the University of Maryland (two from Azerbaijan and Georgia, one each from Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and Moscow) to participate in the "Partners of the Conflict Building Peace Bridges in Transcaucasia" project.
 And since Nikolay Hovhannisyan was also the head of the "Armenian Center for Conflict Resolution", his participation was aimed at presenting the position of the Armenian side on this important issue of concern to the Armenian people, listening to and also getting acquainted with the position of other participants, especially the Azerbaijani side. which, naturally, differed not only from the point of view presented by the Armenian side, but also was quite far from the motto of the main council of the gathering, the main meaning - to approach the solution of the problem from the positions of tolerance (tolerance), listening to each other.
 Based on this, the Armenian side presented to the participants of the meeting their position, which led to the principle of self-determination of nations accepted by international norm 583 HISTORY and the restoration of the historical truth.
 Undoubtedly, N. Hovannisian's mission to the University of Maryland International Event to Discuss International Development and Conflict Resolution is effective in that he used the opportunity to once again present the Nagorno-Karabakh issue to the international community and the readiness of the Armenian people and all Armenians to resolve it. in a political way.
 It should also be noted that the materials of the above-mentioned event, organized by the University of Maryland, USA, the reports and opinions of different authors have been published in a separate book, [16] which makes you more convinced of the differences, approaches, opinions and more. There is a way to solve this problem that worries the world today.
  But regardless of all that, you are more convinced that the only right, preferable way to resolve conflicts is dialogue, coming to a mutual agreement and not confrontation and military conflict.
 Among the works on the topic under discussion are also "War XX century" [17] Kalashnikov Maxim "XXI bloody century. Катастрофа неизбежна ”[18], in which the authors present the wars fought and being fought in the XX and XXI centuries, the disasters caused by them, the infinite human losses and other deprivations.
 DN Baryshnikov's "Conflicts and Peace Policy" is also quite relevant and important, where the author discusses issues such as issues of history and peace in the socio-political mind, sociological foundations of conflict studies, international law on conflicts, international on the peaceful settlement of disputes, security, humanitarian law, etc.
  The author highlighted 584 HISTORIES such as political conflicts, Cold War issues, international terrorism, with which the present world is so full, etc.
 It is also interesting that the author was not satisfied only with theoretical interpretations of conflicts, but with concrete examples showed the reality of the current world conflicts, which is a great threat to human society, its present and future generation, the suppression of which is not the monopoly of any country, but the whole It is the problem of humanity, a part of which, without arrogance, is an important, valuable part of our people, which, unfortunately, for many objective and subjective reasons, like many other peoples, finds itself in the clutches of conflicts, especially facing the solution of such a problem as the well-known Nagorno Karabakh (Artsakh). ) is the issue of settlement and so on.
 Also noteworthy is Bogdanovich V.Y., Manachinsky A.Y., the ruler of the USSR "[19] The peculiarity of this work is that the authors tried to present decades of living side by side after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the emergence of newly independent states, but The many conflicts that have already arisen between each other, the wars of small and large scale, a considerable part of which, to which we have also referred, are still going on.
 The authors rightly note that after the end of the Cold War, the world is now involved in a series of conflicts and undeclared wars.
  And based on these considerations, the authors tried to analyze the conflicts of the post-Soviet period, which, unfortunately, still continue to this day.
 In addition to theoretical material, the work resolves conflicts and wars such as the Chechens, the Ossetia-Ingush, the Georgian-Abkhazia, the Georgian-South Ossetia, the Karabakh and other conflicts in the Transnistrian, Crimean, and Caucasus regions.
 Naturally, the authors should have given an important place especially to the Crimean issue, the issue of military security of the Republic of Ukraine.
  And in order to show the horrors caused by wars in general, the authors bring many facts from different periods of history and especially present numerous examples of wars, losses to humanity, and destruction in the 20th century and its aftermath.
 It is interesting to note that during the last 3400 years of human history, only 250 have been peaceful years, which means that wars have become a common occurrence between people.
  It is not accidental that 200 years ago the famous German military expert Karl von Klausewitz said that war has a tendency to resort to extreme measures, extreme steps.
  [18, p.34,36] Based on this, let us also say that this conclusion was most evident in the 20th century, which, although considered to be perhaps the highest, most developed period of human civilization, was also one of the bloodiest periods, if not: the bloodiest, which surpasses all times in its barbarity.
 Suffice it to say that two world wars took place in the 20th century, causing tens of millions of casualties, devastation, deprivation, and so on.
 Another issue that worries me is that the share of civilian casualties in the current wars is quite large.
  For example, if the civilian population was 5% of the total casualties in World War I, then during World War II the figure was 60-66%, in the Korean War (1953-1955) - 84%, in the Vietnam War (1964-1973). about 90%, and in the last two decades of the 20th century, that is, 586 HISTORY, 1980-90, 80-90%, which means that in the future it seems that the borders of war and peace will be gradually erased, especially now that the international In practice, there is almost no fact of one state officially declaring war on another.
  [19] And if we add to the above the fact that in the present world more civil wars and conflicts are provoked, the picture will be more complete, which means that humanity today, in parallel with daily life, is facing wars, terrorism and various conflicts every day. with.
 Therefore, by military conflict we mean the conflict of socio-political groups (social group, society, state) using military force.
 It should also be noted that the other feature of the issue under discussion is that in modern conditions military conflicts can not always be of a military nature.
 As the authors of the above work write, V.Yu. Bogdanovich and others, the military, armed struggle today is not about one state conquering and occupying the territories of others, but about strengthening its economic and political positions, pushing others out of the world economic hierarchy, increasing its influence and so on.
  [18, p. 41] Speaking about the same issues - wars, conflicts and other similar issues - M. Lebedeva in her work "Peace Policy" [6] also addressing the issue of conflicts, notes that after the end of the Cold War the world seemed to be and entered a long period free of conflicts, but, unfortunately, in reality they began to take on a new nature, especially in the developing countries, Yugoslavia, the republics of the former Soviet Union.
  Suffice it to say that in the 1990s. In the post-Soviet region, there were 170 conflicts, of which 30 were out of 587 HISTORY, and in 10, as the author notes, the case came to fruition.
  [6, p. 187] It is appropriate to say here that the author took a very lenient, if not superficial, and overlooked post-Soviet conflicts, which in some places escalated into direct hostilities, taking tens of thousands of lives, hundreds of thousands of migrants, and devastation. which is another study material.
 As for the steps taken by the conflicting countries, or rather the international community, to stop the bloodshed, to conclude the above-mentioned conflicts, to find a way to stop the bloodshed, to conclude reconciliation, it must be said that all parties failed to do so. No matter how much the UN and the OSCE have addressed these issues, taken many decisions, but almost did not take tangible and effective steps, no matter how much they were created for that very purpose - to prevent, reject, public In addition to forming an opinion, use more effective levers to prevent, resolve, and justly resolve such conflicts.
 .
