In the case of online teaching, universities should also be provided with broad academic freedoms in shaping the content of the educational process.
  Despite the fact that the educational programs are "molded by the requirements of the established standards, nevertheless, due to the peculiarities of distance learning, the universities follow the path of academic freedoms.
 The pursuit of academic freedom has always been evident in the traditional education system.
  The provision of higher professional educational services is aimed not only at the interests of the student, but also at the interests of the employer.
  Dynamic changes in the labor market can force the employer to take an active part in urgently correcting or improving curricula.
  And thus, in such situations, the university can not strictly comply with the requirements of the letter of the educational standards 86 86 MANAGEMENT letter, delay and not operatively respond to the ever-changing demands of the labor market.
  Therefore, the university system is provided with a framework of academic freedoms to change the content of educational programs, so that, taking into account the requirements of the employer, the curriculum is reformed until the state approves the new generation of state standards.
 When securing a competitive position in the education market, universities strive to take into account as much as possible the interests of students and changing requirements in the formation of the content of education.
  In particular, based on the student's preferences, it becomes an issue to review the composition of elective courses, to address the dynamic changes in the forms of certification and assessment of knowledge, which should not be outdated.
  Therefore, universities are given some degree of freedom to deviate from the requirements of educational standards, ensuring the attractiveness of education among students.
 At present, the universities also strive to combine different forms of education during the mastering of the basic professional education program.
  Thus, in the case of existing education, it becomes effective to provide students with distance learning in some modules, which on the one hand saves the cost of providing educational services at the university, on the other hand, also improves the structure of students' workload.
 Therefore, without compromising the quality of educational services, universities are given some freedom to combine existing and distance learning technologies.
 Studies show [1, p. 7] that the European educational institution has the right to: - change the number of subject groups by up to 5%, - change the content of program materials for individual subjects within 15%, - define the ways of conducting intermediate attestation; MANAGEMENT to use the reserve time of the educational institution for specialization, as well as production (professional) practice, - to determine the total volume of educational load (classroom and extracurricular) for each subject, - to take into account the professional subject group and specializations. Recommendations of stakeholders (social partners) - define elective subjects as follows:to ensure the competitiveness of the graduate, at least in the regional labor market; - to formulate the list of optional (optional) subjects and their content according to students 'preferences; - to define the procedure for recording students' absences; - to combine different forms of education during mastering the basic vocational education program; actively participate in the engineering of building their educational programs.- to combine different forms of teaching during the mastering of the basic vocational education program, - to allow students to participate as actively as possible in the engineering of the construction of their educational programs.- to combine different forms of teaching during the mastering of the basic vocational education program;
 International experience shows that the share of non-compulsory (optional) modules included in educational standards is about 30%.
  Therefore, the student, based on his preferences, chooses not only an educational module, but also even teaching professors.
  Such academic freedom significantly contributes to satisfying the learning preferences of the client (student) of educational services, but at the same time increases the student's level of responsibility in ensuring the quality of the learning content he has built [1, p. 9].
 88 MANAGEMENT The freedom of workload of students involved in distance learning programs is also extended by the use of a multi-factor knowledge assessment system by the university, when in addition to intermediate and final exams, module mastery is assessed by individual work, e-learning attendance, and e-test.
  Therefore, the student himself decides the "decisive directions" of the formation of his grade mentioned above.
 Thus, if a student taking a distance learning course has largely attended video and audio classes on the Internet and actively participated in hands-on activities, WEB seminars, earning a high grade in the module, he or she may be somewhat relieved and have relatively little time for intermediate and final exams. preparation and vice versa.
 Thus, the distance learning student is given certain freedoms in shaping the structure of academic working time.
 In the case of expanding the academic freedoms provided to students, as a rule, most of the learning takes place outside the classroom and as a result, students are actively involved in planning and organizing their own learning.
  In such a situation of providing educational services, students can choose not only what they can learn, but also imagine why and how to learn. is the volume of lectures (see Figure 1.).
  At the same time, a new quality of teacher-student relations is formed, based on the creative organization of individual work and the quality of teacher-student relations.
 89 GOVERNANCE In this case, the scope of academic freedoms increases, as the shift of the center of gravity of the contact hours from the student flows to the individual student, students and lecturers gradually abandon the traditional stereotypes of teaching and take a mutually analytical approach in each case.
 Figure 1. The structure of a student's academic hourly workload.
 "Lecture-centered learning" "Student-centered learning" 90 MANAGEMENT In addition to the differences between online teaching and traditional distance learning in the professional literature, there are a number of typical psychological pedagogical problems that teachers and students have to solve.
  They are: 1) difficulties related to the interpersonal communication of the participants in the learning process, 2) problems related to the formation of effective small study groups for collaborative learning, 3) problems related to the study of individual characteristics of information perception by listeners to organize a more effective learning process , 4) the lecturer's compliance with the selected methodological and pedagogical technologies for distance learning [2, p. 13].
 However, regardless of the above-mentioned difficulties, student-centered online teaching will occupy a dominant position in the educational market in the foreseeable future and will have promising organizational features. First. Designing a new WEB classroom concept that will move traditional learning approaches to the electronic environment as much as possible.
  In this case, it will be possible to use in the virtual environment lectures, seminars-discussions, group presentations, debate clubs, round tables specific to traditional classroom learning, which will be possible to organize with modern information technologies.
 Second, the introduction of pedagogical innovations that will provide active and exhaustive feedback between teachers and students, as well as academic collaboration between student groups.
  In addition, pedagogical innovations will be targeted at student-centered learning, when the student will take an active part in the process of self-education, will develop his / her professional skills through e-exercises, will pass electronic tests through a self-assessment system.
 Third, the expansion of e-government, when the academic behavior of students involved in the online system will be fully digitized and will be controlled by the e-dean's office.
  In such a case, the efficiency of the administrative activity of the deans' offices, chairs and the purposefulness of distance learning courses aimed at meeting the needs of education beneficiaries and improving the quality of online educational services will be significantly increased.
 .
