As a reliable knowledge, it should be noted, first, that the mountains of Ararat, the country and the kingdom mentioned in the Holy Bible correspond to Armenia, and second, that the ark-carrying mountain of the sacred axes of Mesopotamia (Kordvats Mountains) is Urartu-Armenia-Armenia.
  See recent articles on bibliographic information [1-3].
 The bearer and disseminator of the Jewish tradition of the flood is mainly the Jews in the homeland and the Diaspora and the Jews in general.
  If the Mesopotamian legend was spread in the Greco-Roman world as a cognitive knowledge, then the myth of Noah in the Jewish Diaspora as a religious scriptural knowledge.
  Consequently, their pre-Christian areas were incomparable in favor of Mesopotamia, even if we take into account that during the Hellenistic period, Jews cut from Hebrew extracted sacred religious information from the Greek Bible translated by them (Septuagint = Seventy-III BC). I cc.).
  It may be that from this time on, a very common phenomenon among later Christians, the tendency to “biblify” the world, or in other words, to adapt world history to the Bible.
  Understandably, this tendency must have relied on the Scriptures, especially the Genesis account and prophecies.
  The above-mentioned tendency was naturally manifested in the settlements of the Diaspora, where the Jews lived in a community.
 246 It is known that in BC. I d. In the first quarter, the Armenian king Tigran the Great settled a large number of Jews in the cities of Armenia, including Cappadocians, Cilicians, Greeks and Jews.
  The latter had been in Armenia before before through natural, scattered deportation (migration) (see Demographic Movements in Armenia in the 1st Century BC [4], p. 156166), so they did not leave any significant trace in the Armenian reality. , but here is BC I d. In the II half, when the Jewish emigrants, who in the V c. In the Armenian reality, they are called Jews, they settled en masse and integrated in the new socio-economic and cultural environment.
  It is not difficult to imagine that in this respect the colony was brought from "Hayahre" by the colony, because the Holy Bible gave a rich opportunity to the Jews to glorify their new settlement as a "paradise" and the resting place of Noah's ark.
  Moreover, the “favorable” combinations of Scriptural references and geographical and toponymic data provided an opportunity to surpass not only the Jewish colonies of the world but also other Jewish communities in the host country.
  Needless to say, the advertisements of their colony and country were delivered by the Jews of Armenia to various trade centers, and the pilgrims to Jerusalem, for the news of all the Jews.
  In fact, if centuries ago the land of Ararat-Armenia appeared in the Holy Book [5], then in BC. I- AD I cc. The Holy Book appears in Armenia, because through the Jewish communities the Armenians assimilated not only some information from the Holy Book, but also the newly created community traditions and interpretations.
 It is known from the "History" of Pavstos Buzand that there was a "Jewish" community in the town of Goghtni Nakhchivan, which together with all other communities in the IV c. 60s captured by the Persian Shapuh II.
  The Jewish colony of Greater Armenia has existed for about four hundred years, and in such a long time the idea of ​​the Nakhchivan colony that Noah's ark landed on the top of Masis-Ararat or the Taron Jews' belief that their ancestor Sam first lived on Mount Sim could be widespread. at the foot, and that they began to disperse in different directions from Tsronk, and so on.
  Interestingly, the Jews who followed the false etymological tradition of Sim-Chronk considered Mount Judith of Korduk to be the resting place of Noah's Ark, because the latter was 247 closer to them and publicly accepted in the area.
  At the same time, it was possible that the inhabitants of Goghtn perceived the name of their province as a modified form of the word "migration", because the migration of Noah's descendants started from there and so on.
 There is no doubt that many Jewish communities viewed the highest mountains in their area as potential contenders for Noah's Ark, as they all well understood that their Bible does not name a specific place ("on Mount Ararat"), so it had to be found.
  For that, as it was said, being high in the environment is not enough, an additional clamp is needed.
  And the "Jews" of Nakhchivan found that fight. They paid attention to the fact that the city at the foot of the highest Avag-Azat-Masis (5165 m) is called ... Nakhichevan.
  It is supposedly small, the village on the slope of the mountain is also called ... Akori (Arkuri).
  Here are powerful battles for you to substantiate the Ark Mountain and to inform the world and the local Armenians, for whom Azat-Masis is a mythical and dark mountain, a haven for heroes and demons.
 Let's try to place these observations on the historical basis with relevant facts.
 Nakhchivan, the famous center of the historical Goght province in Eastern Armenia, which has been mentioned in Armenian since the 5th century, is still called Nakhichevan in the vernacular.
  Between the initial and final versions of the toponym, it must be assumed that the link "Nakhchavan" / "Nakhchevan" was a connecting link, as can be seen not only from the Turkish pronunciation of the city and province, but also from the Armenian folk dialects and colloquial language.
 Judging by a popular version ("I went to Shirvana a little later, they came to Nakhchivan" 1), that in XIX-XX centuries. It was spread in Ghazakh province of Elizavetpol province, parallel to Nakhichevan, the name was also used in the last century.
  The antiquity of the Nakhchivan> Nakhichevan crossing can be guessed by determining the antiquity of the Nakhichevan form.
 The saying (= As if they were few from Shirvan, now they came from Nakhichevan) was often used by my grandfather's parents born in the beginning of the XX century, from whom my father Samvel-Andranik Sahakyan (1930-2013) heard.
  Explaining the latter, the saying was used when unexpected guests from different places came home and there was nothing to entertain.
 248 Before that, it should be reminded that the name Nakhchivan is an Iranian loanword in Armenian, probably from the pre-Arshakun period.
  Of course, the existing attempts at the etymology of the toponym are not convincing, which derive the name from the Caucasian surname "first" or from the meaning of nakhchir (= slaughter, hunting).
  The writer of my lines asked the American Iranologist James Russell about the place name during his postgraduate years, when the latter was participating in the first international symposium on Armenology in Yerevan.
 In response, he suspiciously expressed an assumption that "nakhchuan" could mean the most important, the most important, the first.
  This suspicion, however, can be dispelled if such a place name is applied to the government residence.
  For example, in any princely state, the name would have been fully justified if it had emphasized the princely nature of the village or town, as well as the royal family and the court.
  And really, in the case of that meaning, it is possible that the same place name is repeated in different areas: Goght, Shirak, etc.
  Among those toponyms is also the name of a village known from the Mamikonyans' Tayk, Ishkhan (remember Nerses Tayets or the Catholicos of Ishkhan), which should be understood in the pro-government sense.
  For example, according to historian Movses Khorenatsi (III c., LB), the village of Shirak Nakhchuan, which was the residence of the Kamsarakan princes during the Arshakuni dynasty, was really a prince not only by name but also by other features (residence of Kamsarakan people, underground pantry, etc.).
  Since when did Nakhchivan sound Nakhichevan in Armenian?
  Common sense suggests that the borrowed name was coined in the vernacular.
  That is, if the loan was made during the Yervandyans, then at the latest in BC. III century We would have the form of Nakhichevan.
 Fortunately, we are not guided only by logic in this issue.
  We have AD I d. A testimony authored by Josephus Plavius.
  In his book "Jewish Antiquity", telling the plot of the flood, he writes: "When the ark stopped on a mountain in Armenia, Nokos (= Noah) ... stayed there.
  After waiting another seven days, he let go of the animals of the ark, and he went out with his family, offered sacrifices to God, and feasted with his family.
  The Armenians still call this place a place to descend (Αποβατηρίον-Α.Σ.), because the ark was saved there, and the fragments are still shown in that place ”([6], p. 54).
  Scholars almost unanimously agree that the Greek word Αποβατηρίον is a translation of 249 copies of the Armenian toponym Nakhichevan ([3], p. 274 and others, [7]).
  Later, according to Josephus, "Apobasterion" was used as a place name by Eustatius of Antioch (IV century) [8], and Hieronymus, translating it into Latin, writes: "Armenians call this place Exitus or Egressus" (place of ascent or descent) (Hieronimus, Opera omnia, Ed. Vallarsi, vol. III, p. 125 (citation according to [2]).
 It is understandable that the Armenians still call that place Nakhichevan.
  Who, then, decided that it had anything to do with Noah and reported it to Joseph?
  Definitely the representatives of the Jewish community of Nakhichevan, who went to Jerusalem on a pilgrimage.
  This information provided by Josephus is invaluable in other respects as well.
  First, that the early existence of the form "Nakhichevan" is confirmed, second, that the "Jews" of Armenia, rapidly mastering the colloquial Armenian, invented legends corresponding to the Bible through false or so-called etymologies, and that Nakhichevan was perceived as Noah's first refuge in AD. .a. I d. Starting from the second half, the third, which is the most important, they later inadvertently created the symbol of the ark-bearer Masis-Ararat, which nurtured its national identity for the Christian Armenian people.
 But it was said that not only Nakhichevan, but also the name of Akor served as a real basis for the legend of the ark-bearing mountain.
 Although the name of Akor is not mentioned, the Bible indirectly implies that Akor's planting of a garden on a mountain slope.
  In any case, the latter is derived from the first, so either the Jews strengthened the fact that Masis was the ark holder, or, more likely, the local Armenians, under the influence of the legends of Noah and Nakhichevan, became close to the neighboring Jews.
  The fact is that the ancient information about the vine is still old (1st century), as evidenced in the works of Josephus Plavios, which, unfortunately, did not find a place in the Armenian translation (hmm. [6] and Josephus Flavius, Antiq Jud., (163) (cited in [2], p. 35) and in the Book of Jubilees [9].
  However, they, as S. Oral verbs directly from the book have nothing to do with Armenians or Armenian Jews.
  As for the Book of Jubilees, it must be said that the story of the vine in question came from the same oral tradition, except for Korduk, because it refers to Mount Lubar ([9], p. 9).
 One can assume that if the name of the city at the foot of Mount Masis was not Nakhichevan, Masis would not be a ark-carrying mountain, or 250 other legends would have been invented.
  Or if there was a Jewish or Jewish community in the Nakhichevan settlement of Shirak or in the village of Ijavan in Vanand, maybe Aragats would become a candidate for the ark-bearing mountain and so on.
  This is a conclusion from the poetry of the genre of storytelling, not a prediction.
 It is possible that the "probative" power of the name Nakhichevan was so great that under its influence another place meaning "settlement town" later appeared in Korchayk province, already in a Christian or Islamic environment.
 In fact, all the disputes that have been made over the question of when Masis has been recognized as a ark-bearing mountain, because that tradition dates back to BC. It has existed continuously from the 1st century until today.
  For comparison, let us remember that the tradition of Mount Judy, the ark-bearer of the Armenian province of Korchayk or Korduk, dates back to ancient times, perhaps in BC From the II millennium, because at the time when the novel of the Mesopotamian flood was being woven, various Semitic ethnic elements already lived in the southern regions of Ararat-Urartu-Armenia.
  That is why all the names given on the high peak of the Cordovats mountains have Semitic origins2, so the names of Ararat and Kardou are invented, and Sararad should be considered the result of a literary misunderstanding, as M. Emin, St. Malkhasyants, Friedrich and others.
 According to the laws of inheritance and interpenetration of cultural traditions, it was quite expected that the example of the Mesopotamian legend and its ark-carrying mountain would localize the story of Noah's Ark in Korduk, as it may have been the first to guess Nikoghayos of Damascus. d.).
  However, this natural cultural phenomenon was diverted by the Jews living in the center of Hayk, who reported to the world that Azat-Masis was a mountain like a ark, showing the connection between the page of the ancestor Noah and Nakhichevan.
  This news is not yet known to the author of the "Book of Jubilees", but at the same time he is already known to Josephus Plavios.
  The latter is the versatile author who knows both the Mesopotamian ark-bearing mountain and the Hebrew. Doesn't the place name Kordu (+ q) have the same origin?
  The question is valid if we take into account that his resemblance to Gudron is not accidental, and if not, the question is superfluous, in a word, it is a matter of historical-comparative phonology.
 The new ark-bearing mountain of 251 novels, therefore, itself assumes a connecting role between the two traditions.
 A problem arises from the above provisions. What did Joseph think when he saw that the story of Noah did not coincide with that of the Mesopotamian authors?
  Considering that the two accounts relate to Noah only by changing his name, he sought to reconcile and reconcile them.
  And this can be clearly seen from the fact that Josephus first tells about Nokos, then brings the opinions of the narrators of the Mesopotamian tradition, as if to show that it is about the same flood.
 This may be confirmed by the fact that Josephus introduced some elements of the Mesopotamian story into the Hebrew story.
  Among them are, for example, when he writes that "most of the people could not escape the flood because they could not escape" ([6], p. 54), or when he writes that "it is still shown in that place (the ark) fragments "[6].
  Moreover, it seemed to Joseph that some of his predecessors could learn details, such as the location of the ark or the place where the ark landed.
  It is not for nothing that the author of the "Book of Jubilees" thought that Mount Lubar, which is in fact one of the Mesopotamian epic elements, was the place where Noah's ark landed.
  Here is a combination of these two epic stories and the reconciliation of their differences, which we saw in the embryonic state in the sources called "Jewish Antiquity" and "Jubilee Book", will soon be imitated and become a stylistic trick in the works of Christian historians (Eusebius of Caesarea, Moses of Khorenatsi and others).
  With the spread of Christianity, the followers of the Jewish tradition increased, but most of them in the early centuries still tended to show the Ark Mountains in Korduk.
  As Buzand, Khorenatsi and others testify.
  Gradually, however, the opinion of the Jews of central Armenia and the local Christian Armenians that Masis is the ark-carrying mountain is becoming more and more entrenched and spreading.
  This interesting manifestation of competitive culture has given birth to a new geographical name for both mountains. In the case of Mount Judy, Ararat, in the case of Masis, Ararat.
  Why? When the book was mastered by the local Christians, first in several languages ​​(Assyrian, Greek), then translated into Armenian, the biblical phrase "in the mountains of Ararat" was perceived not literally in the mountains of Ararat as a land name, but began to understand, or rather, to make sense. as a mountain name in Mount Ararat 252.
  This belief was gradually strengthened by the parallel circulation of the novel, but earlier testimonies have been preserved from Korduk, as can be seen from the references to him (Yeprem Asori, Hakob Mtsbnatsi, Pavstos Buzand, Movses Khorenatsi).
  It is interesting that the epic elements of the miracle in the behavior of Hakob Mtsbnatsi, which were told around Mount Korduk (Assyrian Mount Kardou, which was invented from the name of the province and is the name of Judy-Good), were later transferred to Masis, so to this day Massa is mentioned. Hakob source.
  However, it was probably too late for Masis to use the name Ararat, because we find one of the earliest evidences of Gr. In the Book of Narekatsi (10th century), where Mount Ararat is not figuratively taken as a scale, as mistakenly translated, but as a criterion of height, a high point ([10], p. 127).
  Even if we consider the testimony of Vardan Areveltsi coming from Yeghishe, we will have not only the 5th century. mention, but also argumentation of two parallel names. "Some people say Mount Ararat to the Kurds, but let the true truth be known to him in Masis Gol" ([11], p. 245).
  Why Masis, because, according to the author, the name of the province is Ayrarat, from which the name Ararat comes.
  This gives reason to claim that the example of getting a mountain name from the province was taken from Ayrarat, used in Korduk (cf. Ayrarat> Ararat, Korduk> Kordu> Kardu), and before that both of them got the same mountain name - Ararat / Ararat.
  In the future, the ark-carrying mountain will be more connected with the province of Ayrarat than with Korduk, until the latter is expelled.
  One of the oldest evidences is the mention of Hieronymus (IV century), in which, however, the mountain name is not mentioned3, but which will play a great role in the rooting of the ark-carrier Masis-Ararat in the public consciousness of Christian Europe.
 .
