The aim of the research is to make a statistical assessment of the employment rate according to the methodology of the National Statistical Committee (NSC) for 2018, which is carried out in accordance with the standards of the International Labor Organization (ILO), and to find out that in 2018. What changes have taken place in the labor market as a result of the methodological changes made?
  Therefore, the task is to analyze the study of indicators characterizing the labor market, such as labor shortage 346 ECONOMICS, decent and productive work, employment indicators, etc.
 According to the International Classification of Occupations, there are three categories of employment: hired workers, self-employed and working family members [1].
 The self-employed, in turn, are additionally divided into the following categories: employers, self-employed, members of a production cooperative.
 In the context of economic growth, the outflow of employees from agriculture to industry and services could be expected, and accordingly, the share of hired workers would increase and the share of the self-employed and working family members, many of whom had previously worked in agriculture, would decrease.
 According to 2018 According to the methodology used, the term "economically active population" was renamed "labor force" and the term "economically inactive population" was renamed "population outside the labor force".
 Labor resources are the sum of the population aged 15-75 (employed and unemployed) and out of the labor force (unemployed and not looking for work).
 Out of the labor force, the population includes persons who did not work and did not look for a job during the study period, were not employed or unemployed, in particular: Սովոր Pupils and students disconnected from existing education and production. Ված Household. Ողները Those who take care of children and sick relatives.  Persons who do not work and are not looking for a job for various reasons (retirees (age, privileged conditions, disability), income earners from the use of property, conscripts, etc.) [2].
 347 ECONOMICS These are the key provisions of the formula "Statistics on Labor, Employment and Labor Misuse" (19th AVC) adopted at the 19th International Conference of Labor Statistics.
 The labor force includes the employed and the unemployed, who in the labor market provide labor supply for the production of goods and services.
 According to the methodology used in 2018, the total number of people employed is those who are engaged in the production of products exclusively for their own needs.
  As a result, both the total number of the RA labor force and the total number of employed persons have decreased. Table 1. The main indicators of the labor market in 2017-2018 [3] 1 2017 2018 2017 2018 by according to by according to new according to new former former methododemodethodamethodabanubanubanubanubyanub man (man) man) man) Labor Resources 2029,3 2029,3 2021,3 2021,3 Employed 1016,2 906 1074,7 927,7 Exclusively for own consumption Goods Production 110,3 110,3 158,1 158,1 The table shows that according to the new methodology, the number of employed has decreased, as the employed are no longer included in the production of goods for own consumption.
  According to the NSC, in 2018 According to previous and new methodologies, the employment rate was reduced by 5.4 percentage points from 50% to 44.6% [4, 79 pages].
 It should also be taken into account that according to the RA Law on Employment, students and conscripts are considered employed, while according to the ILO methodology, only contract servicemen are considered employed.
 According to the ILO, the unemployment rate is determined by the share of unemployed and actively looking for labor in the workforce.
  This indicator may vary by country due to various factors.
 Underemployment The underemployment reflects the underutilization of labor potential productivity during the observed week.
  The international definition of this indicator was adopted by the 13th ICLS in 1982, amended in 1988. By the 16th ICLS and then clarified in 2013. By the 19th ICLS.
  Thus, according to the ILO definition, underemployment occurs when an employee wants and can work during a given period, but not of his own free will.
  The time he works is not enough for the normal duration of work.
 This indicator is especially important for a more accurate description of the employment problem, as well as for assessing the level.
  According to the ILO methodology, the unemployment rate is calculated in the total number of people employed by the specific weight of the number of hours worked.
  In some cases, underemployment is seen as partial unemployment.
 The labor force underutilization index includes the following 3 sub-indicators: Unemployment, underemployment and out-of-work population.
  This indicator reflects the mismatch between labor supply and demand in the labor market, ie in one case it is a question of qualitative mismatch of labor resources, in the other - quantitative mismatch.
 349 ECONOMICS Table 2 2. Labor Abuse (AT), 2017-18 Average level of I-III quarters,% [5, 81 pages] AT1. Unemployment rate,% AT2. Unemployment due to working hours and unemployment rate,% AT3. Unemployment and combined labor force level,% AT4. Aggregate rate of labor underuse,% Unemployment rate,% Long-term unemployment rate,% Calculation according to the previous methodology 2017 Calculation according to the previous methodology 17.7 Calculation according to the new methodology Calculation according to the new methodology From the table .
  According to the new methodology, unemployment in 2018 increased by 6.4 percentage points, which was assumed.
  Other indicators of labor shortage have also increased.
 Employment indicators are not only the most important macroeconomic nature of modern society. The table was compiled by the author 350 ECONOMICS, but also describes the social situation of the country.
  The relationship between the moral values ​​of the society, the quality of the employees and their employment is obvious.
  After all, unemployment is also a cultural factor.
  [7, p. 30] We distinguish the following forms of employment: full-time, part-time, effective employment, shadow employment, seasonal employment, part-time employment, etc.
 In case of full employment we understand the natural level of unemployment, ie the existence of frictional and structural unemployment.
 Thus, full employment reflects the degree of quantitative and qualitative correspondence between the labor supply of the population and the available jobs.
  Full employment can exist with certain deviations from existing jobs. when the professional and qualification structure of the employees does not correspond to their educational level due to the status of the economy.
  Ensuring full employment is possible only as a result of the application of market and state regulation mechanisms.
 That is why the problem of effective employment arises.
  There is a wide range of opinions among economists on this issue.
  Many economists mean effective employment of the population, which provides a decent income, health, raising the educational and professional level of each member of society, based on increasing labor productivity.
  Such a definition of effective employment is quite acceptable. it involves the multifaceted development of man.
 The main goal of the ILO is to ensure dignified and productive work among women and men in conditions of freedom, equality, social guarantees and respect for human values.
  Decent work should play a central role in the development of economic and social policy. 351 ECONOMICS.
  Decent work is central to the fight against poverty. It is a sustainable means of economic and human development.
  The ILO establishes the principles of decent work, promoting job protection and safety.
 Problems with labor protection and productivity are part of the ILO Target Program, which is called: In Focus Program on Safety and Health at Work and international politicians, especially after the financial and economic crisis of 2008, began to take urgent measures to create high-quality jobs, along with the protection of workers' social security and rights, which led to sustainable economic growth and It is the guarantee of overcoming poverty.
 However, using such a broad definition, it is not possible to measure effective employment by a single indicator, but it is possible to measure it by a system of indicators.
 Indicators of effective employment are the level of employment of the working age population, the level of employment of the able-bodied population in the public sector, the proportions of labor resources distribution by sectors of useful labor, the structure of rational distribution of employees by industry and economy, the new level of optimal professional structure.
 The structure of employment to some extent reflects the general structure of the economy and is greatly changed due to the impact of changes in the economy.
  The urgency of the analysis of the structure and level of employment is conditioned by the reflection of social, economic, ethnic, demographic aspects in the unity of social life. 352 ECONOMICS.
  Therefore, not only the quantitative assessment of the content of employment, but also the most qualitative assessment plays an important role in the process of reproduction of public life.
 The main reasons for the difficulties related to employment in Armenia are: Անհ Inadequacy of the qualifications and level of education of the graduates of the educational institutions to the demand of the labor market (taking into account the innovations) բաց Lack of effective (gross) demand for goods and factors of production (Keynesian theory) հիմն Problems of scientific and technological progress (Marxist theory) in institutions; ։ Lack of clear alumni employment strategy.
 In our opinion, in the conditions of post-Soviet transition economies, particularly in the Republic of Armenia, where market relations and the main mechanisms of the market are at the initial level, the introduction of the idea of ​​"Nordic synthesis" is appropriate.
 The idea of ​​this scientific direction is to argue the idea that modern economic theory is full of employment and economic growth as elements of a market management mechanism based on the principles of economic liberalism, as well as elements of the Keynesian concept that reject the nature of the free market.
 It should also be noted that employment in a market economy is never universal, it is a relative concept.
  The competitive environment, the movement of capital brings with it the amount of "reserve" labor force, and in this respect, objectively, unemployment arises.
  Unemployment 353 ECONOMICS is a state of the economy where part of the able-bodied population wants to work, but becomes redundant due to lack of jobs and a mismatch between labor supply and labor market demand.
 In the conditions of dynamic economic development, it is impossible to develop a unified employment theory that includes the patterns of labor market development, because "everything changes and updates over time."
 In conclusion, we can conclude that in a market economy, employment problems and their components acquire new features in theoretical and practical terms.
  This problem is urgent for many countries, and its solution will create a basis for creating a productive economy, which can ensure the socio-economic progress of society.
 Thus, we can say that although according to the new methodology the level of employment is reduced, but this can be a basis for identifying deep problems in this area, developing possible solutions and implementing comprehensive measures.
  That is, in 2013 The purpose of the resolution "On Statistics of Labor, Employment and Labor Misuse" adopted at the 19th International Conference of Labor Statistics is to develop labor statistical activities, including the workforce, through the creation of a sufficient information base.
  To achieve the goals of this system, measures such as the monitoring of labor market and labor shortages, the implementation of economic and social policies related to job creation, vocational training and education, as well as the implementation of decent employment policies, which will be employment, should be implemented. the basis of level growth.
 .
