In philosophy, the coverage of the content panorama of the terms "thought" and "thought" is obligatory, as their semantic definitions have always been confused.
  It should be noted that no such Armenian-language research has been done so far, and that is why the representative of the field does not have the opportunity to understand what the content of the 320 PHILOSOPHIES contains.
  In our scientific realm, terms exist as words, but no essential distinction is made.
 The aim of the article is to understand the basis of the human mental structure, which is the starting point in the knowledge of the world.
  As a result, it is revealed what framework of "responsibility" each of the discussed terms has in that case.
 A small number of existing English and Russian language literature was used.
  The method of analysis is presented from the letter. it is historical-comparative.
 From the time of Aristotle onwards, the first mental experiments of the intelligent being were aimed at discovering both the ontological and epistemological origins of the world.
  If in the metaphysical biological world the categories of the label (space, time, existence, matter) that have been labeled "classical" for more than two thousand five hundred years have been the target of research, then the interpretation of the potential of cognition has inevitably been related to intelligence and consciousness.
 In different platforms of time, man has in one way or another conditioned the cognitive orientation of his existence, in one case by acting according to social "dictation" in the form of culture, religion and other sources of service to the spiritual, and in the other case by choosing the national-ideological guide.
 But it is clear that a person on both sides has become fully in control of his way of thinking in the case when he has had the ability to reveal the possibilities of his recognition, regardless of the complex of obstacles that are implicitly assigned to him and imposed in that sense.
  And one of the last and, probably, the most basic is the linguistic one.
  Referring to F. Bacon, the publisher of the 17th-century constraints or "ghosts" in the process of world cognition, who declared "Knowledge is power", thus clearly emphasizing his special attitude towards the cognitive domain, one can show the dangers that tend to to stop the process of thinking and, in particular, cognition.
  Attributing a central axis to the method chosen in the process of knowledge in this 321 PHILOSOPHY activity, in his work "New Organo" he refers to four "ghosts" or "idols".
  For the thinker, the target of the test is the reality of wrong thinking as a result of the misuse of words.
  Apparently, he would like to think that the words are attributed to the phenomena as a result of the baseless decisions of the society endowed with the psychology of the crowd, which received the passport of mass culture.
  And this "surprisingly molds the intellect" [1, p. 19].
  This cognitive view of the past suggested that man had given a full-fledged role to speech in the forefront of his communication, which ensured the vital fact of uniting one another.
  But now, in the modern world, where the "sunset of civilization" has been recorded, the lost character is represented as a kind of person who does not seem to carry the genetic code of his ancestors, and creates his humanism by obtaining "verbal" raw materials not by historical reason, but by his own. under the guidance of profit.
  In the modern image of not understanding each other, an environment was formed incompatible with nature, in which the word "my" is not identical with the meaningful "yours". The ambiguity of the words that are nourished three times is broken.
  In the scientific community, such similarity has always been discussed under the guise of sophistication, when the theory did not have a solid argumentative basis, and the point of view did not differ from the opinion.
 And this is the reason why today, more than ever, the inquirer presents an application for honesty in his activity by building a scientific language apparatus, ensuring the etymological accuracy and semantic load of the terms used in the study.
  The above is conditioned by the intention to define the content panorama of the terms "thought" and "thought".
  Clarifications on the questions of how the mental essence of the individual is formed and whether it exists in itself, or whether it is merely evidence of the experience of culture, society, and perhaps of all-encompassing existence, can be summed up in a sense within these two terms.
 The first semantic interpretation of thought was given by the American philosopher R. Emerson, when he attributed the main philosophical significance of the soul as the source of values ​​and truth [6, p. 25].
  I would like to say that the thought is the evidence of the conviction of these two life bases.
 Examining the concept of "thought", the first steps of the research contain formulations on the ambiguity of this term in different episodes of the history of science and philosophy.
  And indeed, if we refer to the etymological interpretations of terms, we will notice that in the professional literature there is a complex picture of their comprehension, and sometimes also semantic identification.
 In particular, the mentality is recorded as a deep level of collective consciousness, "which also includes the unconscious" [4, p. 525] and the mindset (mentality), "a set of predispositions and intentions that serve to make the individual perceive the world in a certain way" [4, p. 525] explanation.
  From the point of view of revealing the rationale of existence, it should be noted that the notion of the concept as a pillar of individual consciousness was also present in the historical-philosophical platform, but the hint of extreme polarization reflects its critical vision between the social and the individual.
 In the model of the mental construction of the world, the mind is sometimes attributed to the role of a beacon for the formation of national characteristics necessary for the provision of human habitation in the living world.
  No matter how fashionable the phrase "marginal" reality is today, it is appropriate to emphasize M. Luttsev in this regard. see Lutcev filos. science. M., 2005, pp. 22-24.
 323 PHILOSOPHY The visibly perceptible clashes loudly proclaim especially the cultural fragmentation.
  And in this regard, the discovery of the cause-and-effect connection of thought and structure is considered relevant, contrary to the principle of the above-mentioned binary opposition.
  Thought is the unity of the elements that make a nation "national", which exists, because there is an idea, the reason for the existence of that integrity.
 Contrary to these interpretations, professional literature, and more specifically, English philosophical thought, provides a complete coincidence in the definition of the terms under discussion.
  Applying "Mentality" to both, it is defined as "the quality of thought that characterizes an individual or group of individuals" [7, p. 484].
 The word "thought" was first used as a scientific concept by the French philosopher and ethnographer L. Levi-Bruhl.
  He distinguishes two types of thinking: pre-logical and logical.
  The first was attributed to the tribal community as a prototype of the society, mainly Australians and Africans, with their conservatism and common practice since their formation.
  A mentality that was disproportionate to the rational thinking of the people of Europe [3, p. 24-37].
  The author probably had a tendency to point out that the basis of the formation of the human mind necessarily depends on the geographical, social and chronological criteria of his residence.
  This view seems to be in favor of an observation that develops the philosophical interpretation of ideas, which raises the possibility of coordinating the types of ideas.
  However, in this model the subject shows the dependence on the way of understanding the outside world, when, in particular, its essence is conditioned by the forms of religious and linguistic manifestation26.
 This point of view of the examination of the question was presented for the first time by the advocate of neo-Kantian philosophy E. Kasir see Cassirer J., Selected. 324 PHILOSOPHY As for the bases of philosophical observation of the mind, they appeared in the 30s of the XX century. to the thinkers of the French "Annals" historical school.
 L. Fevr, co-founder of the school or a representative of the first generation, explains the idea from the point of view of social-historical psychology.
  Studies show that humans acquire their thinking habits, perceptions, and emotions without realizing it, and it is this "heritage" that most likely shapes the human being.
  Such firm notions are “inserted” into people's minds through culture as well as upbringing through social interaction.
 As a result, the thinker presents the understanding of thought not as a biologically stable, but as a historically formed structural unit that determines people's behavior, values, feelings and thoughts.
 Years later, J. Dubey, who belongs to the second generation of the above-mentioned school, gives a more specific definition of thought: "it is a system of ideas, ... which ... underlies the views of man about the world and his place in it, and which determines the behavior of people and the steps to be taken "[2, p. 52].
 It is interesting to note that for the first time a professional roundtable discussion on the methodological problem of clarifying the ambiguity of the content ratio of thought and thought was held in the Russian scientific-philosophical field in 1993, the concluding provisions of which were published in "Philosophical Issues".
 Turning to the conceptual structure, it should be noted that it has been circulating in science as an independent subject of study since the 1940s, but some aspects of the study of the phenomenon have received the attention of different schools of thought and schools in the earlier period.
  In a number of philosophers (S. Montesquieu, J. Herder, G. Hegel, Im. Kant, etc.) sometimes the thought developed in the context of the idea of ​​this or that "spirit of the nation", identifying the thought and the national feature.
  After that, the development of "psycho-philosophical ethnography" was ensured at the end of the XIX century and the XX century. At the beginning of the 19th century, representatives of Russian religious philosophy such as V. Solovyov, L. Loskin, G. Fedotov.
  And already the lens of social philosophy has been seriously considered by N. Berdyaev, S. Frank and A. In Dmitrieva's writings.
 It should be noted that one of the most obvious semantic interpretations of the existence of terms, through each other or due to each other, speaks of the volumetric inclusion of thought by the mind when the social, historical, territorial, religious levels of existence are revealed [5, pp.17-30] .
 When studying the structure of thought, it is credible to be assertive about one of the types in which the relationship between the subject and the object of public consciousness is considered key.
  And this, the multipolarity of the content of the term can be summarized by the following separation of structural levels, where the structure contains:  private (particular) layer or, that is, unconscious. It reflects the general tendencies of private life and greatly influences the formation of a person's social roles, as well as the nature of relationships with others.
  At this level, everyday relationships are combined with rituals, social norms, values.
  In fact, the first of the levels represents the world of social interactions, to which it is impossible to apply the "clamp" of return in the sense of transforming it; Շերտ layer of "spiritual identity". the culture of a particular social community, its uniqueness, its adaptability and 326 PHILOSOPHY, which are manifested at the level of reflection;  social response layer. the reaction of the individual or the society to the political realities and to the state power in general;  metasocial layer. Ethnocultural orientation (eg national ideology) to be formed by making reflections on the external environment and the inner world.
 Here are the four components, the sum of which represents the meaning and essence of the second of the terms.
 As a result, it was not so much the epistemological dominance of the concepts circulating over each other that was revealed, but the specific frameworks of their content.
  Summing up the historical-philosophical interpretation of the terms, it seems that the concept emerges from the position of the basis as a basis for the visible manifestation of the reality of individual socialization, and considers the definition of the quality of thought acceptable as a category for the concept, which is a prerequisite for the existence of collective consciousness.
 Thus, thought expresses its philosophical value in the field of social collectivity, and the existence of thought is mainly motivated by the imperative of living the social-biological, anthroposociogenic process of modern man in philosophical anthropology.
 .
