"It is not obligatory to respect me as a person, but to respect the court is obligatory.
 "I do not care what you think of me, but you must respect the judiciary and the law," said Frank Caprio, the most famous and popular judge in the United States today.
 Respect for the court has a significant impact on the efficiency of the judiciary and the independence of the judiciary.
  Of course, the factors influencing the mentioned phenomena are numerous and multi-layered, each of which deserves attention.
  The society or the individual who respects the court will never try to put pressure on it.
 It should be noted that when we talk about the issue of lack of respect for the court, we mostly mean not the court and the parties, but the court-society relations, because in the first case the parties are more constrained 21 JURISDICTION both psychologically and clearly formulated legal norms that reduce the manifestation of manifest disrespect to the court.
  Moreover, the criminal legislation in force in almost all countries prescribes appropriate penalties for disrespectful treatment of the parties by the court.
 In the modern information age, when anyone other than the media is essentially the source of information and social networks are the main tool for disseminating it, the good reputation and honor of courts and judges become virtually vulnerable and defenseless under the uncontrollable flow of information.
  More often than not, modern information platforms make it possible to exert covert pressure on a judge or to discredit not only a particular judge but also the entire judiciary even after the entry into force of a judicial act.
 The above phenomenon is known in the history of law as "scandalizing the court" [1].
 Why history, since it has essentially lost its relevance and is obsolete in its country of origin, England?
  Recently, however, discussions on this term have been reviving in some, mainly in the professional circles of developing countries, and it has been given a new color and legal formulation.
 In English criminal law, "scandal of the court" was considered a form of disrespect to the court, which was expressed by spreading information that harmed the reputation of the court, sowed distrust in the court or cast a shadow over the judge's impartiality.
 In essence, the term "court scandal" is used to describe a harsh treatment of a court in connection with completed cases or in general (mainly through publication), which is intended to undermine the authority and public confidence in the judiciary. [2]
 The term originated in the 18th century [3] and became widespread when Judge Lord Mansfield amended the John Wilkes case and a certain Mr. Almond published and began selling a "Letter of Defamation, Orders (Decisions), Document Seizure." an anonymous booklet entitled "and ..." stating that the court had amended the judicial act on J. Wilkes "without due process, unfounded and illegal" [4], thereby questioning the judge's honesty, impartiality and case law. respect for him and assuming that he had shown political bias.
  History has shown that the booklet was so popular that it was republished three times.
  When prosecutors filed a lawsuit against the publisher, Judge Wilmott prepared a draft court order, but in view of the fact that Almond had pleaded guilty and apologized to the judge, the prosecutor dismissed the charges.
  Only 37 years later was this decision (essentially the draft) published in Judge Wilmott's collection of court precedents, becoming a precedent for such cases and a subject of wide-ranging discussion in doctrinal circles.
  In particular, it stated that there could be no greater scandal than when pamphletists and journalists presented to the people that the judiciary, which was called to protect them, was irreversibly corrupted.
  In that case, the court can retain its power, but it will immediately lose its authority, and the judiciary cannot survive long without authority.
 Due to the restriction of freedom of speech, the manifestation of the absolute inadmissibility of criticism of the judiciary in English law lasted until the beginning of the 20th century, when R v.Gray (1900) and subsequent cases defined as "court scandal" any action or fire 23 JURISDICTION It is necessary to sow contempt for the court and demean its authority, provided that the courts and judges are open to criticism.
  Therefore, if the criticism is based on reasonable judgments, from which it can be concluded that the judicial act does not comply with the law or is not in the public interest, then it can not be qualified as a "court scandal".
 In various court precedents of the "court scandal" of the 20th century, we find positions taken by the courts that, on the one hand, urge judges to "sometimes" silence / ignore "and, moreover, not to use this leverage to silence critics. because the highest value of the bet is the freedom of speech.
  The English case law of the new era considered it acceptable that a person has the right to call a court act unfair or illegal.
  On the other hand, the courts ask their opponents (inside and outside the parliament) to remember that ex-officio judges are deprived of the opportunity to give an adequate response and, moreover, to enter into a political dialogue.
 In modern times, as mentioned above, English law is almost forgotten, and in 2012 an advisory report published by the UK Legal Committee suggested that Parliament abolish the institute of "court scandal" [6], which is not the case with other British Commonwealth countries. This institution is still relevant and we still find discussions on the issue in judicial practice and doctrinal circles.
 It is noted that if such cases have not been seen in the United Kingdom for a long time, then in small countries such as Mauritius, the judiciary is more vulnerable and it is necessary to investigate the answer to the court scandal [7].
  A similar view is expressed with regard to Singapore.
  The Supreme Court of Zimbabwe ruled in 2000 to justify the crime of "court scandal", arguing that the courts have no other platform on which to respond to criticism.
  They cannot discuss such matters in public without compromising their impartiality.
  That is why such protection is provided to judges and not to other officials and politicians.
 In contrast, in Canada, the United States, and Australia, the institute in question is seldom successful because the courts restrict it to the sacred right to freedom of expression.
 If we study the attitude of the various member states of the British Commonwealth towards this issue, it becomes clear that where members of society have a relatively high legal and political culture, the level of democracy is high, freedom of speech is guaranteed and there is a high degree of public control over government. They forget this institution.
 Of course, we strongly believe that the problem is not only that the courts and the democratic society in those countries prefer freedom of speech and the need for public control over state bodies at the expense of reducing the authority of the judiciary.
  We think that the reason, among others, is that the members of the society have learned over the years to respect the judiciary and not to cross the boundaries of reasonable criticism, and the courts have earned that respect through their activities.
 However, as mentioned above, the term "court scandal" has been the subject of debate from time to time, especially since the advent of the Internet, and especially in developing countries, including the Romano-Germanic legal family. conduct that directly or indirectly seeks to undermine the authority of the judiciary.
  In French professional circles, this phenomenon is called "criticism of judges", but disputes related to it are examined in civil proceedings.
 As an interesting example, let us bring the thesis discussed in Russian professional circles that it is necessary to legislate the issue and establish responsibility for those who, using the opportunities created in the modern world, try to discredit or put pressure on the court by disseminating ordered and published materials in the media.
  Thus, in 2019, the Chairman of the Council of Judges of the Russian Federation V. Momotov circulated his report "Respect for the Court as a Legal Category" and later developed the idea that the "court scandal" should be enshrined in Russian law as a separate offense, citing its justifications [10 ].
 In the same year 2019, the Assembly of Judges of the Russian Federation adopted the concept of information policy of the judiciary, which enshrined "scandal of the court" as "... manipulation of public opinion on the judiciary, humiliation of its authority, irregular and unfounded criticism, which shakes public confidence in the justice process. "And it was considered very necessary to envisage responsibility for the manifestation of this phenomenon in the media. [11]
 As expected, in response, the media raised the issue of who scandalizes the court more, the media, or the judges themselves, for their inappropriate, sometimes publicly perceived immoral behavior, corruption scandals 26 LAW involvement, etc., bringing facts substantiating their arguments.
  As a result, in our estimation, the community of judges, as it is mentioned in a well-known Russian saying, wanted to do good, it turned out, as usual, they opened the Pandora's box and the Internet was flooded with factual information about judges scandalizing the judiciary.
 As for the Armenian reality, the term "court scandal" as such is unknown to our reality, which we can not say about the phenomena assumed under the term.
  As in the rest of the world, in our country, with the widespread use of the Internet, information materials that criticize the judiciary, as well as discredit the limits of reasonable criticism, have become more frequent.
  The latter can not contribute in any way, and more often, they hinder the preservation of the high authority of the judiciary.
 Moreover, as is typical of many modern young democracies, in Armenia, too, the representatives of different strata of the society, as well as the judges themselves, act as scandalous subjects in the courts.
 As for the various attempts of the general public to scandalize the court, it should be noted that the Supreme Judicial Council of the Republic of Armenia has recorded a similar phenomenon and has referred to it on several occasions, stating that expressions that in some cases turn into curses ... ”
  Highlighting the possibility of sharp criticism and free expression in a democratic society, the BJC called on everyone to refrain from insulting and spreading such insulting remarks against judges and assured that they would continue to take the necessary steps to ensure the transformation and recovery of the judiciary, which will contribute to 27 JURISDICTION to build public trust and respect for the system and to refuse to express insulting views about its members. [12]
 The direct, legally prescribed obligation of judges is to act within the framework of the law, not to allow violations of the norms of substantive or procedural law or the rules of conduct of a judge, to maintain high authority over themselves, the court and the judiciary.
  Meanwhile, in the history of the Third Republic of Armenia, there are many cases when judges themselves scandalized the judiciary with their behavior, and these cases, including due to the exercise of the right to speech and freedom of the press, became known to the general public as a basis for disciplinary proceedings.
 With the recent legislative changes, a toolkit was introduced in the RA legislation - a procedure for checking the morals of judges, which, in our opinion, is also an effective way to prevent the judiciary from being at least scandalized by judges.
 Summing up the historical-comparative analysis of the "court scandal" as an institution, let us note that we do not share the view circulating in Russian legal doctrines that actions aimed at scandalizing the court by members of the public (and the media in particular) should be unequivocally criminal. .
  Without denying the widespread prevalence of this phenomenon in the modern reality, we find that its elimination must be conditioned, on the one hand, by the sowing of high legal culture, democratic values, trust and respect for state institutions among the members of the society.
  On the other hand, it should be facilitated by the representatives of the judiciary, with their high moral qualities, professional restraint, professionalism, openness to public scrutiny, accountability, and manifestation of other qualities presupposing good manners.
 After all, it is no coincidence that the institute in question in English law became almost obsolete when the courts gained high public confidence in their work style, recognized the importance of the right to freedom of expression in democratic societies, and public representatives, particularly the media, accepted reasonable criticism and courts. the rule of not breaking the invisible solid line between not being unnecessarily scandalized.
 .
