The aim of this study is to study the effects of technology on children's brain structure, nervous system, sleep, speech formation and stimulation, as well as to find out what consequences to expect from this effect.
 The methodology used in the research is the analysis of the existing scientific literature, which includes studies in the fields of neurophysiology, psychiatry, pediatrics and other scientific fields.
 In the article, the authors use the terms "technologies, Internet, screens" in a general sense, as "use of the Internet for various purposes, smartphones, tablets, TVs, etc., electronic attachments, as well as their digital content."
 The urgency of the study is due to the unprecedented prevalence of technology, as the use of technology in children's lives is growing day by day, while the issue of their usefulness or harmfulness from a neurobiological, psychological, pedagogical and even psychiatric point of view.
  Only through a thorough study of these issues will it be possible to understand how our decisions will affect our children's development and future.
 The development of a child's brain in early childhood is conditioned by neurobiological grounds.
  At birth, humans have about 85 billion neurons in the brain that store and store information.
  When a baby is born, each brain cell has about 2,500 synapses, connections that allow it to transmit impulses along brain cells.
  Over the next three years, that number grows to 15,000.
  Synaptogenesis, or the formation of connections between neurons, begins in the prenatal period and continues with varying intensity throughout life.
  Although most neurons in the brain are present at birth, they are not yet fully mature and strong.
  Over the next few years, dendrites, the branching extensions of neurons that collect information from other neurons, are in the process of reproduction.
  Because of this abundant proliferation, a single neuron in a two-year-old can have thousands of dendrites.
 This period of rapid nerve growth is called synaptic blooming.
  The formation of synapses during this period plays a crucial role for the basic functions of the child's development - hearing, speech 434 PSYCHOLOGY and cognitive processes.
  This period becomes extremely important in the baby's life for the development of higher level functions.
 The flowering period of nerve growth is followed by the period of synaptic pruning, when the number of nerve connections is reduced, thus making the ones that are not reduced stronger.
  Researchers believe that this synaptic reduction makes the brain work more efficiently, allowing the brain to master more complex skills.
  Only the experience gained in early childhood determines which of the synaptic connections is preserved and which is lost or pushed to the back layers.
  Eventually, about 40 percent of synaptic connections are lost during adolescence.
  Thus, the flowering period of neural growth falls in the first few years of life, and the reduction of nerve synapses continues in childhood and adolescence in different parts of the brain [5].
 It has long been a well-known fact that speech and language skills are most easily acquired during the first ten years of life, when a child's brain connections focus on acquiring language skills and other higher cognitive abilities.
  Constantly speaking live speech clearly helps to strengthen the neural connections of the child's brain, which allows him to learn more words more easily.
  The language can be learned in many ways, such as everyday dialogue, songs, rhythmic quatrains, reading a fairy tale, etc.
  Early development of various skills and abilities is a strong guarantee for the development of the child's learning, communication skills and other positive abilities.
  Numerous studies have shown that a child's feelings affect the workings of his brain and the connections between nerve cells: positive emotions - positive, negative - negative [6] [p 25].
  Positive interaction with adults stimulates the child's brain and intercostal connections, 435 PSYCHOLOGY, as a result of which the synapses increase and the existing connections become even stronger.
  Constantly used synapses become permanent.
  If the baby's brain receives less stimulation, synapses do not develop and the brain makes fewer connections.
 A new study published by the Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center has found a close link between structural change in the brains of preschoolers and overuse of the technologies listed in the American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines.
 FMRI brain studies reveal the link between screen use and children's brain development, especially in language development, reaffirming the need for preschoolers to minimize screen time.
 The study found that children who spend more time in front of screens have lower structural integrity of the brain's protein tracts in the parts of the brain that are involved in developing speech and letter recognition skills.
  Other skills whose formation and development have also been identified include imagination and other cognitive processes, as well as behavioral self-regulation mechanisms.
 The same group of researchers offered another, even more interesting study to children: to perceive stories in three ways, only in audio, animation and illustrated versions.
  This time too, the method of collecting the results was to decode the fMRI images of the brain.
  The results were astonishing. It turned out that the format of the illustrated book supports language thinking and encourages the development of children's active pictorial imagination, while animation has hindered such integration in favor of continuous audio-visual perception.
  As the children read through the illustrations, the activity of the language network on the fMRI images became more active.
  Most importantly, in the form of an illustrated book, fMRI researchers have found that the communication and development links between all the networks studied have grown and strengthened.
 Director of the Institute of Child Health, University of Washington D. Christakis' research has revealed a strong link between non-normative brain stimulation in early childhood, excessive audiovisual stimulation, and later in cognitive decline and attention deficit, behavioral hyperactivity.
  The laboratory-stimulated hyperstimulation model was tested on young mice.
 During the 42-day experiment, seventy decibels of auditory stimulation were combined with visual stimulation, recreating the reality of watching a cartoon on TV.
  After 10 days of cognitive and behavioral testing, mice overstimulated in all tests showed significantly lower cognitive performance and hyperactive behavior.
  The results suggest that excessive, irregular stimulation during the critical period of brain development, including background television, can have obvious negative effects on the child's neurocognitive functions in the future.
 Numerous studies have focused on the use of technology and sleep disorders.
  Sleep is the predominant activity of the infant and plays an important role in neurodevelopment and synaptic flexibility of the brain. [11] [pages 173–179].
  Both the brain and sleep patterns undergo significant changes during the first years of life.
  Given that nerve plasticity peaks in early childhood and adolescence, sleep during this critical period has the greatest effect on the brain and cognition.
 Guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the World Health Organization (WHO) provide the required sleep duration for children to promote optimal health, which specifically states 437 PSYCHOLOGIES that children 1 to 2 years old should sleep regularly for 11 to 14 hours per hour (including daytime sleep), children 3 to 5 years old - 10 to 13 hours, children 6 to 12 years old - 9 to 12 hours (we present average numbers) [12, 13].
 However, numerous studies show that 20-30% of children have trouble sleeping.
  One of the external factors of insufficient sleep is digital technologies - television and video games.
  Numerous studies have linked increased screen time to decreased overall sleep time and late sleep, leading to cognitive, behavioral, somatic, and other problems [14], [15], [16] [17].
 Researchers at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore say that watching TV for more than two hours in children under the age of five can lead to behavioral problems.
  The same study directly linked the presence of television in the bedroom to sleep deprivation and decreased emotional reactivity, as well as low levels of social skills.
 A study of 715 babies aged 0-36 months in the UK found a consistent relationship between the frequency of use of screens and other technologies and the duration and form of sleep.
  It has been proven that the total duration of sleep has been reduced with a reduced duration of night and daytime sleep, and the period preceding the actual sleep has also been extended.
 The presence of any electronic device in the bedroom is associated with nighttime sleep deprivation, which is due in part to melatonin pressure.
 Studies show that the quality of children's sleep is significantly affected by the presence of the TV in the bedroom, the duration of viewing and the selected part of the day.
 In particular, watching TV in the evening has a significant effect, as the blue light of the screen affects the production of melatonin in the body and the rhythm of sleep.
  Analyzing twenty-nine studies involving the Internet and video games, their treatment and genetic factors, including brain imaging, experts have concluded that the behavioral addictions of the Internet and video games, the underlying psychological mechanisms, and the underlying causes of drug addiction are the same.
 Thus, studies of brain screening at rest have shown that long-term internet gaming has affected the areas of the brain responsible for reward, impulse control and the sensorimotor system.
  Brain activation studies have shown that video games lead to the loss or alteration of these parts.
  The study also notes that video game images have activated the same areas of the brain that are activated by drugs.
  Moreover, video games have been associated with the release of dopamine, which is similar to the mechanism of drug abuse.
  Russian psychiatrists Perezhogin and Vostroknutov, Zalmunin and Mendeleevich also conducted studies in this field. They also emphasize the similarities between Internet and computer game addiction and drug addiction. [20] [p.86 A large-scale study by Kuss and Griffiths in 2012 noted the effects of video games on the hormone dopamine and compared them to the mechanisms of chemical dependence. [22] [pages 347-374] Conclusion Suggested Ways to Solve Children So, how do we deal with children, encourage or ban technology-child communication, worry, or approach research results with reservations?
 439 PSYCHOLOGY It may be difficult to give a direct and unambiguous answer, it is necessary to take into account that technologies open a world of infinite possibilities in all spheres of life, but they also bring with them great risks.
 One way or another, technology is an integral part of our lives and it is no longer possible to separate it from everyday life.
 Moreover, technologies will continue to develop and invade the most incredible areas of life.
 This generation is at risk of constant brain stimulation and opportunities like their parents did not have, they eat and watch TV every minute, use social media and social media as a child, and science is still exploring the general effects of light habits and the real consequences.
 We base our opinion on current research, which, however, is not yet final.
  In order to fully understand this topic and find the real scientific and valid impact of technology on children, it is still necessary to continue to consider the developmental stages and multiple domains of children affected by various technologies in the coming years.
 It is unrealistic to completely cut children off from technology.
  This will require incredible effort from all members of the family and a huge change in lifestyle.
  Are the adults, the parents and the parents of the parents, who are surrounded by technology for more than twenty-four hours today more than ever?
  From a psychological point of view, it is not the technologies that cause the problem.
  Moreover, if we use them purposefully and in moderation, we get great benefits, make positive changes in the child's life.
 In order for children to be able to use technology in their lives in a healthy way and to enjoy its benefits, it is necessary to provide parental control, accordingly, moderation.
  Parents who appreciate the benefits of 440 PSYCHOLOGY technology and want to prepare their children for the demands of the 21st century labor market and everyday comfort must understand that they are nonetheless responsible for following the basic rules of child technology.
 At least at an early age, a parent has the power to set rules, make thoughtful decisions, and form positive habits.
  Early childhood is the period when the parent is the only one responsible and the shape of the child-technology relationship.
 Practical tips on how to regulate this relationship երեխ The child should be introduced to the screen at the age of 2-3 years and never before.
  Make a conscious decision to shape the parent's occupation or free time through the use of technology in the child.
 ։ It is not allowed to use technology instead of live communication with the child.
  At an early age, they contribute neither to the formation or development of speech, nor to the development of imagination, nor to other cognitive processes.
 ։ It is important to remember that excessive and irregular stimulation, which is important for early brain development in early childhood, including background television, can have obvious negative effects on future neurocognitive functions.
 Առնվազն Screens should be turned off at least an hour before bedtime. Restful and long sleep is one of the guarantees of a child's neurodynamic development.
  It should be reminded that the flashing light of the screens interferes with the production of melatonin in the body and the circular rhythm of sleep.
  Realizing this, the parent should avoid installing a TV in the child's room and bedrooms.
 ։ It is necessary to set clear limits and be consistent in following the rules of technology use.
 441 PSYCHOLOGY AND RESTRICTIONS Children should not be expected to follow the rules on their own.
  In early childhood and up to 5-6 years old, and now even later, children do not yet know the mechanisms of self-regulation.
 ։ The key to the success of the right relationship with technology is to establish positive communication between all family members.
  Positive communication creates a sense of security and positive emotions in the child, which mostly contributes to the strengthening of interpersonal connections.
  Studies also show that children over the age of childhood are driven to the screen by boredom, lack of real communication, and busy parents.
 ։ Bad habits are the result of our parents being inconsistent.
  And a very short and fast way separates us from a bad habit to addiction.
  It is necessary to form positive family habits and to encourage the child's interests and to participate in them.
 ։ It is important to choose one day a week with the family to spend without technology.
  It is necessary to make the child a direct subject of planning that day, taking into account his wishes and preferences.
 What immediate benefits can be expected?
 Breaking the touch of digital devices and increasing the quantity and quality of live communication will contribute to the correct formation and development of children's speech and communication skills, emotional sphere and self-management mechanisms, will provide improved self-care skills, sleep regulation, in short, a healthy and happy childhood.
 .s
