Although Armenia has been a de jure official full member of the Eurasian Economic Union for more than two years, according to various scientific and expert assessments, Armenia is still on the path to membership and integration, having many external significances. possible dangers and other challenges.
  According to that, as mentioned by the Armenian economist, Doctor of Economics A. According to Tavadyan, they mainly stem from the internal crisis and inconsistencies, largely due to the uncoordinated foreign exchange policy and the rather high level of inflation {1}.
  In the EEU member states, including Armenia, from the beginning the structural problems of the economy prevailed, to which were added the integration problems, especially the anti-Russian sanctions and the oil prices.
 The rather poorly diversified economy and the underdevelopment of the innovation sector in Russia and Kazakhstan, whose total GDP is 95% of the GDP of the EEU countries, are highly dependent on hydrocarbons.
  The reduction of budget revenues in foreign currency, the decrease in the level of purchasing power, the fall of the ruble and the reduction of investments in Russia led to the decrease of remittances from that country to Armenia, which is of vital importance for the Armenian economy.
  In this regard, it seems important for Armenia to rethink economic policy priorities, clarify goals and bring economic governance infrastructure in line, especially by developing and implementing a new model of economic development with the EEU countries, and forecasting the expected results.
  From that point of view, it should be noted that there are 436 Eurasian Economic Politics within the Union, a working group on Armenia's cooperation with the World Trade Organization (WTO) is being formed {2}.
  It is especially important in terms of the responsibilities and regulations undertaken by the Republic of Armenia within that organization.
  By joining the WTO, Armenia has undertaken obligations not to exceed certain limits on customs duties on all goods.
  By changing the customs duties of some Armenian goods by joining the EEU, they exceed the mentioned limits.
  In accordance with the WTO procedures and procedures, bilateral negotiations on tariff changes will be conducted only with those WTO members and on the products for which those countries will have the right to negotiate and will have a corresponding wish.
  At the same time, it should be noted that the EEU is not represented in the WTO, while Armenia is a member of the WTO.
  On the other hand, changes in the current tariff rates are a matter for the EEU and not for individual EEU members.
  Therefore, Armenia is represented in the WTO processes as a member of the WTO, and in the process, in general, in any format, we can say, the EEU is also involved as a competent body on the issue.
  Based on this general point of view, in fact, the foreign economic relations and development prospects of the EEU member states should be regulated, including for Armenia.
  At the same time, the trajectory of EEU-China cooperation is quite promising and at the same time multifaceted challenges.
  Still in 2015 In February, just one month after the official launch of the Eurasian Economic Union, the Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Russian Federation to China Andrei Denisov announced the intention of the parties to establish a free trade zone.
  Both China and Russia are advocates of deeper integration in the Eurasian region, but both have their own ideas about integration.
  In the case of Russia, the integration processes 437 POLITICS are unfolding in the context of the EEU, while China has been following the "Silk Road" doctrine put forward by President Xi Jinping since 2013.
  In both cases, the goal is to deepen economic interdependence and interdependence in the countries of the Eurasian region in favor of the economic and geopolitical interests of these countries.
  In this context, from at least one point of view, the goals of the two programs coincide, and the conclusion of a free trade agreement becomes an optimal scenario.
  Therefore, the question of what economic consequences the signing of such an agreement may have for the Eurasian Economic Union and, in particular, for Armenia, becomes interesting.
 The EEU and China are two geographically neighboring and interconnected regions, and thus historically stable and close trade ties have been established between the parties.
 The chart below shows the share of exports to China in the total exports of the EEU member states (See Chart 1).
 Schedule 1. Shares of exports to the EEU countries to China As can be seen from the graph, in recent years only Armenia among the EEU member states has registered a continuous increase in exports to China.
  In this situation, it seems that the free trade agreement will become the very key that can increase the volume of exports from Armenia and solve a number of economic problems.
  However, the figures can also be deceptive, as the increase in the share of exports to China was registered not due to the absolute growth of exports, but due to a sharp decline in exports to other countries.
 The point is that as a result of the decline of the Russian economy and the devaluation of the ruble, there has been a sharp decline in exports from Armenia to Russia, and in these conditions the share of China has increased, while in absolute terms exports in 2014. Reduced from $ 414 million in 2015 reaching $ 315 million.
  At the same time, the uniformity of exports from Armenia to China is deepening.
  2015 99.36% of exports were provided by crude, slag and ash.
  This sector is one of the least value-added sectors of the extractive industry, so it is unrealistic to expect that the increase in exports of this product group will lead to significant profits and additional budget revenues.
  Moreover, the increase in the production of such products can be worrying in terms of damage to the environment.
  At the same time, such products as food and agricultural raw materials (28.56%), minerals (27.1%) and precious stones and metals (20.4%) գեր 3 մնում remain predominant in the commodity structure of Armenia's exports.
  In all these areas, China is one of the most important suppliers to the world market, and if we take into account the underdevelopment of the RA-China transport infrastructure, we can rightly say that the EEU-China free trade agreement will hardly help domestic producers in these areas to enter the Chinese market.
 At the same time, in recent years, the share of imports from China has been increasing in all EEU member states.
  Cheap Chinese goods can easily drive national producers out of the domestic market, damaging domestic production.
  The volumes of imports from China in Armenia are also quite stable and, in contrast to the structure of export goods 439 POLITICS, are quite diversified.
  Therefore, it is possible that in case of concluding a free trade agreement, Chinese producers with a number of products will start pushing local producers out of the Armenian market.
  In these conditions, the question arises whether the free trade agreement envisaging the abolition of customs duties is in the interests of Armenia or the EEU.
  It would be wrong to expect that the free trade agreement will increase the volume of exports from Armenia and will create new jobs.
  On the contrary, it is more likely that cheap Chinese goods, which are currently highly competitive in the world market, will be able to easily drive national producers out of the market and increase the unemployment rate even more.
  It will not be inappropriate to consider the EU example in this context.
  The European Union is China's largest trading partner, and China is the EU's second largest trading partner.
  Despite the fact that the EU has a relatively stable economy and significant competitive advantages in foreign trade, the European Commission continues to delay the conclusion of a free trade agreement with China, thus protecting the common market from the influx of cheap Chinese goods and all the negative economic consequences.
  At least at the current level of economic development, it would not be wrong to follow the example of the EU.
  Both Armenia and other EEU member states should focus on increasing the competitiveness of their national economies and supporting their national producers, as only countries with highly competitive and stable national economies can benefit from the deepening integration process. 4}.
 Thus, in case of Armenia's membership in the EEU, the following external problems and challenges are raised. ։ The absence of a common border means that trade between Armenia and the EEU member states is carried out through a third country or countries and is subject to customs clearance, which can create very difficult situations 440 POLITICAL SCIENCES, especially in the conditions of rather tense geopolitical processes.
 Մ Customs duties in Armenia and EEU member states are formed on different principles.
  Having no natural resources, Armenia has formed its foreign policy on the principle of applying low customs duties on import resources, and the EEU member states, which have natural resources, have set high tariffs on imported resources to protect their markets.
  By integrating into the EEU, Armenia is also obliged to increase its customs duties, which is not in the current trade and economic interests of Armenia.
  Therefore, it would be beneficial and beneficial for the Armenian side not only to make the imperative of making this law pro-Armenian urgent, but also to achieve concrete decision-making in favor of the Armenian state, which is possible in the conditions of mutually beneficial policy.
  The legislation regulating the trade and economic field of the Republic of Armenia has been harmonized with the EU legislation for many years, but not with the EEU member states.
  By joining the EEU, the Republic of Armenia undertakes to apply the laws in force in the EEU, which in many cases are based on other principles, in particular, the Republic of Armenia did not apply mandatory product standardization approaches, but applied technical regulation approaches.
  The same can be said about the Sanitary and Phytosanitary requirements, which are based on different principles in Armenia and the EEU.
 Տնտեսական In Armenia and the EEU, the systems of economic activity permits are significantly different.
  Armenia had adopted a liberal policy, and in the EEU member states the control approach still operates, in particular, engaging in foreign economic activities is a subject of permission in the EEU countries.
 ՀՀ Armenia's trade and economic agreements with other countries can remain in force only if the EEU member states also have such agreements, which means that 441 POLITICS Armenia will not be able to conduct trade and economic negotiations on its own after its final integration into the EEU.
  These negotiations can be carried out only under the EEU flag.
 Therefore, in such cases, in case of such legislative omissions, it is expedient to show one's own initiative and achieve pro-Armenian decisions.
 ։ Being a member of the WTO, the Republic of Armenia represented itself in that organization as a separate unit and participated in the decision-making of that organization under its own flag.
  By joining the EEU, Armenia first undertakes to renegotiate its own commitments and from now on submit to the WTO.
 ։ By joining the EEU, Armenia was largely deprived of the opportunity to pursue an independent foreign trade and economic policy, delegating that right to the EEU Council.
 Ստեղծ The creation of a free zone within the framework of EEU-China cooperation has both its positive and negative sides.
  However, based on the factor of EU-China cooperation, experience shows that it is expedient to extend the prospects of creating a free zone for the EEU-China framework.
 .
