Due to the functional analysis of public administration bodies, it is possible to identify duplications and parallels between the functions of government bodies, reduce redundancies, solve systemic and institutional problems, which will create conditions for modernizing the organizational structures of government.
 GOVERNANCE The purpose of functional analysis in the public administration bodies of the Republic of Armenia is to form an organizational model of the public administration of the Republic of Armenia, which will enable the public administration bodies to more effectively carry out only the necessary functions assigned to them.
 International experience of a number of countries [1. 2], indicates that the implementation of public administration system reforms should start with the process of description and analysis of functions in public administration bodies, for the implementation of which the "General Methodology of Functional Analysis [1, pp. 24-44] is used."
  This methodology was also used by the RA Public Administration Reform Commission in 1999-2001, as well as by us in 2018. During the research and analysis of the functions of the RA public administration bodies.
 According to the "General Methodology of Functional Analysis" the functions are classified: Ա "A" - policy and strategy development functions, including policy analysis, evaluation and forecasting, strategic planning, drafting of laws, drafting of contracts, standards and norms. through.
  "B" - service delivery functions.
  This group includes the provision of various services by other state bodies to other state bodies, individuals and other legal-organizational structures.
  As a result of decentralization and decentralization, such functions should be performed by various state agencies, such as agencies and inspectorates, as well as local self-government bodies.
  "C" - regulatory and regulatory functions, including licensing, licensing, quotas, auditing, financial auditing.
 MANAGEMENT  "D" - coordination, control, and performance appraisal (monitoring) functions.
  This group includes the coordination of works, the analysis of the work process and the comparison of different results, the control of the work execution process within the defined terms and the quality of the works, the monitoring of the work performance.
 Ե "E" - Supporting (service) functions, including information systems, public relations, infrastructure and secretarial services.
 2000 The Public Administration Reform Commission of the Republic of Armenia carried out an analysis of the functions of the public administration bodies of the Republic of Armenia within the framework of the "Public Sector Reform Program of Armenia" [3, pp. 22-26].
 2018 The study and analysis of the functions of the RA Ministries carried out by us shows that in 2008-2018. The picture has changed somewhat over time (see Table 1).
 Table 1 1 2018 Results of the functional analysis carried out in the RA Ministries BGDE The table is compiled by us A. RA Ministry of Economic Development and Investment RA Ministry of Finance By type Number of functions and specific weight (%) Total: Name of the Ministry Number of branches MANAGEMENT RA Ministry of Defense RA Ministry of Foreign Affairs RA RA Ministry of Territorial Administration and Development RA Ministry of Emergency Situations RA Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs RA Ministry of Energy Infrastructure and Natural Resources RA Ministry of Diaspora RA Ministry of Nature Protection RA Ministry of Culture RA Ministry of Sport and Youth Affairs RA Transport, Ministry of Communication and Information Technologies 13 MANAGEMENT RA Ministry of Health RA Ministry of Education and Science RA Ministry of Agriculture Total In fact, in 2018. The analysis of the functions of the state governing bodies of the Republic of Armenia carried out by us shows that as a result of 18 years of reforms the picture has not changed yet; the ministries of the Republic of Armenia still mainly carry out the functions of policy development and strategy, monitoring and coordination.
  The picture is the same in terms of service delivery and maintenance, support functions, they make up a very low percentage in the functions of ministries (see Table 1).
 The general study and analysis of the functions performed by the above-mentioned state governing bodies of the Republic of Armenia shows that the principles of their division and distribution are still not clear in the state governing bodies of the republic.
  On this issue in 2018. and 2000. The summary results of the studies conducted in the RA Ministries are presented in Table 2.
 157 MANAGEMENT Table 2 The share of each function performed by the RA Ministries in the total number of functions in 2000. and 2018 Type of Function (A) Policy and Strategy Development Function (B) Service Function (C) Regulatory and Regulatory Function (D) Coordinating and Performance Monitoring Function (E) Supporting / Serving / Function Total: 2000 [4, page 20] Quantity Percent 2018 2018 Quantity Percentage According to 2001 Doctor of Economics, Professor E. According to Ordyan [4, p. 20], about 200 functions (about 25% of the total number of functions) are subject to decentralization and decentralization to local self-government bodies and lower levels of government.
  However, Table 3 shows that in 2000-2018. The number of general functions performed by the ministries decreased by 17.5% (140).
  Moreover, if we also consider the fact that in 2018 The list of existing ministries does not include a number of ministries (RA Ministry of State Revenue, RA Ministry of Statistics, State Register and Analysis, RA Ministry of Privatization, RA Ministry of Urban Development), which are currently bodies attached to the RA Government. According to the results of the survey (see Table 2) 158 MANAGEMENT The 17.5% decrease in functions is mainly due to the change in the status of these ministries.
  Moreover, if we take into account that the functions of the government-affiliated bodies are almost indistinguishable from the functions of the ministries, this fact also confirms that the reduction of the number of functions took place as a result of the reduction of the number of ministries.
  Moreover, in 2000 The list of 17 ministries studied does not include the functions of the RA Ministry of Defense and the RA Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The mentioned ministries are included in our research.
 The data in Table 2 show that in 2000 and 2018 Among the general functions, the policy development functions have the highest specific weight, and the lowest - in 2000. are the functions of providing services, and in 2018 are the supporting (serving) functions.
 Thus, in order to increase the efficiency of the public administration system, the model of decentralization and decentralization can be implemented, in case of which the higher central government bodies perform only the function of state policy and strategy development, coordination of its implementation, as well as monitoring of current activities. The implementation, provision of state services to the population, service, regulation, regulation are carried out by the lower state governing bodies and local self-government bodies.
  As for the supporting functions, we can say that the latter will exist in separate manifestations in all levels of public administration.
 According to our observations, about 300 functions (about 45% of the total number of functions) are subject to decentralization and decentralization to local self-government bodies and lower levels of government.
 .
