Prominent Armenologist Manuk Abeghyan describes Ghazar Parpetsi's "Armenian History" as follows: "Parpetsi is telling a mixed story, which is not at all like neither Khorenatsi nor Koryun, and he himself is very contradictory" ([1], p. 356).
  And at the end he makes a footnote conclusion. "... The passage on the invention of the letters of the history of Parpetsi is still entirely to be studied from the original point of view, as it is clearly seen that it has not remained pure" (p. 358).
  Of course, the contradiction of the original implies that it is distorted, but not to the extent that it is deficient.
 The point is that both M. Abeghyan or the publishers of Ghazar Parpetsi's original and other commentators (see [2], p. 15, ch. 3, [3], p. 3234, ch. 11, [4], pp. 11-12, p. 15) considered that J. At least three paragraphs are missing from the Mashtots story of Parpetsi History, which is the Mashtots Mesopotamian mission and the invention of letters.
 This is the most famous phenomenon in the history of Armenian originality, when we have a complete, complete (not pure) original, but that original dates back to the XVIII century. pen, XIX century. publisher and XX c. It is perceived by the commentator as a deficient original, because the mentioned ones are from the XXI century. Together with the readers, the uncounted exceptions (eg see [5], pp. 223-225, 229-232) are under the influence of Koryun and Khorenatsi 109 Mashtotsapat, which makes the invention of letters inseparable from the Mesopotamian business trip.
  Meanwhile, Ghazar Parpetsi has his own point of view on the invention of letters, which he presented in its entirety, albeit in a slightly tricky and distorted style, in the first episode of his History.
 Here, according to Ghazar Parpetsi, Mashtots's son, Vardan's son from the village of Hatsekats, a royal soldier and scribe, then the hermit Mashtots, who enjoyed great prestige in the society and in the monastic-desert regions, was very worried about the lack of Armenian writing, especially because there are Armenian signs.
 It turns out that one of them informed King Vramshapuh about the existence of these signs in the church, that he had seen them with a bishop in a village.
  Vramshapuh remained indifferent to the news, but informed the Armenian Catholicos Sahak Partev, who also accepted the news indifferently.
 However, as soon as a conversation is opened with Mashtots about the Armenian alphabet, he informs the latter of the information he heard a few days ago from Vramshapuh.
  So they go to the king, who also claims what he has heard. "And when they heard this from the king, they hurried him, saying, 'Hurry up, my great and useful invention of the Armenian world today in your time, which will bring you much more immediate benefit, an unforgettable memory and benefit from the heavenly pleasures, than your kingdom and dominion.' as before you were your ancestors from the tribe of Arshakunyats ”([4], p. 32).
 Praising the king's ambition, Prince Vahrich was sent as an ambassador to the blessed elder Abel, who reported the news, and the latter, in turn, reached out to his close, pious (neither Edesian nor Assyrian - AS). to the wonderful bishop Daniel, from whom he took the signs and brought them to the court.
 Ghazar Parpetsi, who only writes the part about giving the letters according to Koryun, with the corresponding corrections above, almost adds in Koryun's words: "And the Armenian king, the holy Catholicos and Blessed Mashtots, should be happy to receive the sign from Abel" (p. 32).
 With this, the historian Ghazar concludes the story of finding the Armenian symbols and, continuing, presents the task of arranging and implementing the alphabet based on those symbols, which Mashtots successfully does, because he is "professionally" helped by Catholicos Sahak Partev, as from the beginning, and back, he had promised.
 But it turns out that the Armenian alphabet is worthless if it is not introduced in schools, and it cannot be introduced in schools until the Holy Book is translated into Armenian.
  And the most important and difficult task can be done only by Sahak Partev, to whom he is addressed nationally, asking him to undertake this task, which is very reminiscent of the heroism of his ancestor, Gregory the Illuminator, "who led the Armenian world from ignorance to true theology" (p. 38).
  Sahak is crowned with the same glory.
 According to Lazarus, what is the role of Mashtots in the creation of letters? Concerned about the issue of Armenian education, hastening the Catholicos and the king to write, or setting up the signs kept by Daniel with Sahak and establishing schools?
 In fact, it turns out that the signs were not invented, but acquired, and this has been expressed several times in the story of Lazarus.
 1. Showing that Mashtots was worried and sad about not having Armenian education, Parpetsi writes: "For a long time he was blessed by Mashtots and his broken hand, especially the sign in the Armenian language, with which he was able to win over my husband and wife to all the people of the whole church" (p. 30).
 Lazar does not say where Mashtots heard about the existence of signs before learning from Sahak.
 2. After delivering the signs to Mashtots through Elder Abel, Lazarus writes (according to philologists, the original is deficient here, and in the XVIII century the manuscript was supplemented by the Mashtots in Khorenatsi History ([4], 11-12)). "And so the signifier of the accidental invention, the blessed Mashtots acted ..." (p. 34), which must be understood that by the invention of the signs, Mashtots went to work.
 Then the original was distorted ("referring to the Holy Patriarch Hayots Sahakay ..."), so a more accurate reading can be suggested. ".... approaching him with a sarcastic orthodoxy, studying with a step inquiry from the Holy Catholicos Sahakay Zatuta an idea according to the Greek of innocence.
  [And] showing the Holy Patriarch Sahakay an easy way, writing a letter to the 111th Commandment and giving him his assistant and other widows, and thought of the Armenian priest, who was at least as blessed as Mashtots, close to the Greek hegemon. (S.), in which the first name was Johan from the province of the Church, and the second name was Hovsep from the house of Paghana, and the third was from Der Khordseno, and the fourth was from Mushe i Tarono, who, with the help of the blessed Mashtots, met the Armenians according to Atmanun.
  Because they would not have been enough to pay without error directly without leading them to the holy patriarch Sahak, who was undergoing a great deal of training with the knowledge of the Greeks ... ”(pp. 34-36).
  Thus, Mashtots succeeded in every undertaking thanks to Sahak.
 3. Consider another evidence that Mashtots did not invent new symbols according to Lazarus.
  The Armenian high priests with Mashtots, the ministers and the landlords with the king, ask Catholicos Sahak to translate the Holy Book, saying: "May we, before you, blessed Mashtots, who awakened the divine grace in my desire to order the writing of the script written by Zvaghnj (p. The notation, according to M. Abeghyan's correction - AS), which was nowhere to be found in the fire. but the great and useless teachings of the Assyrians worked hard ... until he found (found - AS) a letter and by succeeding in the coming of Christ the growth is still strong ... ”(p. 36).
 As we have seen, there is no original gap in Lazarus' mashtots.
  Just at the end of the 5th century we have a unique history of the creation of letters, which is significantly different from Koryun.
 But the philologists were probably confused by the tribute that Lazarus paid to Koryun in the 10th part of the first episode of "History". "And if anyone wants to know for sure, in the history of the book, the desired Korean, his blessed student Mashtots, will read the news of his life, and write in Armenian the signs when or where or where he got his hands on the Armenian King Vramsh. . which was written by the truly nominated man, the spiritual Koryun, and therefore, after reading us many times, he became informed and informed ”(p. 30).
 In fact, Lazarus was right. If you want to know about Mashtots' life, when, where or by whom the Armenian script was found at Vramshapuhi's request, read Koryun.
  It is quite clear from Lazarus' description that Mashtots did not create Armenian letters.
  It seems that Lazarus read only the beginning of Koryu 112 many times.
  According to Ghazar, Mashtots' further case concerns only the regulation and implementation of the Daniel signs.
  However, it is not strange that after all this, Lazarus almost literally transcribed a small passage from the original of Koryun, the mission of Vahrich and the acquisition of the letters of Daniel, because with that he confirmed the value of Koryun.
 It is another thing that small original relations are observed between the Mashtots of Khorenatsi and Parpetsi.
  Where do they come from, if the story of Mashtots in Khorenatsi's "History" is the result of a later edition (VII-VIII centuries), for which Koryun's "Behavior" and Lazarus' "History" served as a source.
  On the other hand, as we have seen, the main source of the first episode of Lazarus was Khorenatsi's "History" (see [6], pp. 51-91, also [1], pp. 354358).
  In other words, Khorenatsi's "History" was a source for Lazar, and Ghazar's "History" was a source for Khorenatsi's "History" interruptor-editor.
  Let us quote the two original places.
 Մ. Khorenatsi. "Transferring the Atutais from the Armenians according to the innocence from the syllable to the Hellenes" (G.53).
 Ղ. Parpetsi. "He met the Armenian atutais according to the order from the syllogism of the Greeks, by step-by-step inquiry and by learning from the holy Catholicos Sahakay zatuta, according to Yun" (p. 34).
 Մ. Khorenatsi. "... arranged according to form, for example, from the Greek letter zvaghnjuts written from a written letter" (G.52).
 Ղ. Parpetsi. «... order my written script [pkh. From my letter], which he had not taken care of anywhere ”(p. 36).
 It is obvious from the original context that in the case of both pairs of quotations, the lines of Ghazar Parpetsi sound more natural and familiar, and the lines attributed to Khorenatsi are kind of artificial, adapted to the style of the historian.
 But there is another indirect original connection that has not been noticed, but it is very eloquent.
  We have already mentioned that the interrupting-editor of Khorenatsi's "History" recognized Vram as a Persian king instead of Hazkert for the first two decades of the beginning of the 5th century (M. Khorenatsi, III, 52).
  We see the same mistake with Lazarus, but not by chance, because Lazarus thought that Shapuh was still ruling at that time, and Shapuh was actually succeeded by Vram (p. 40).
  So, Vram is the king of dance 113, in one case because of wrong knowledge, in the other case because of wrong belief.
 Is it possible to think, turning Manuk Abeghyan's suspicion (cf. [1], p. 357), that the future editor of Parpetsi's "History" used the mashtots covered by Khorenatsi's "History" editor.
 No, because the two small pieces of information that form the basis of the similarity of the two originals are specific only to the concept of Ghazar Parpetsi's mashtots, according to which Mashtots is not the creator of letters, but their regulator.
  It is not accidental that this new function of Mashtots has given rise to two key terminology - hegena, atuta, in addition to Koryun's syllable-connection.
 If we look at it from this point of view, the problem of original relations is solved in favor of Parpetsi.
  Besides.
 If Ghazar Parpetsi had the mashtots attributed to Khorenatsi in his hand, he probably would not have been satisfied with those two small "ethnography", but he would still have remained true to his point of view, as he remained in the matter of political history when he wrote the history of Great Armenia from division to fall of the kingdom. step by step, extracting from the original of the historian without giving his name.
  This can be clearly seen, at least from the fact that Ghazar, unlike Khorenatsi, silences the special relations between the Persian court and Sahak Partev, and especially the appointment of his son-in-law Hamazasp Mamikonyan as an Armenian commander through Sahak and others.
  It is already clear that Lazar, in case of having a programmatic conviction or point of view, if it is different from Khorenatsi, for example, regarding any historical fact, follows what he knows.
  The best evidence of this is that after the division of Greater Armenia, the Parpatsian order of kings ruling in Eastern Armenia (KhosrovVramshapuh-Khosrov-Shapuh-Artashes) is the same as Khorenatsi, but the number of Persian kings differs from that of Khorenatsi.
 Մ. Khorenatsi. Shapuh - Artashir - Vram - Hazkert - Vram - Hazkert.
 Ղ. Parpetsi. Shapuh - Vram - Hazkert - Vram - Hazkert.
 Artashir is superfluous for Khorenatsi. It comes from the fact that Khorenatsi saw a long-lived Persian king under the name of Shapuh, which is wrong, and Lazarus knows the real Shapuh III, during which Great Armenia was divided.
  Nevertheless, Lazarus, in turn, erred in his rule.
  But the grossest mistake is that Lazarus killed the Armenian king Vramshapuh sooner than the Persian Shapuh, who appointed him, while the real Vramshapuh also ruled during the reign of Shapuh's son Vram and his successor Vram's brother Hazkert.
  Moreover, Mashtots ends the desert period of his life, which will be followed by the invention of letters, in the fifth year of Vramshapuhi, when in fact in that year Mashtots just became religious (around 396).
  Of course, the reason for confusing the beginning and the end of religion is to be found in the distortion of the year of receipt of the letters of Daniel mentioned by Koryun, in the fifth month, which shows that the distortion took place in the fifth century.
 How to explain the ten-year mistake made by Koryun's pen? that he wrote five instead of fifteen, or six instead of sixteen?
  But that mistake was very favorable for Lazarus, otherwise, in the historical year of the invention of letters, Vramshapuh would have died long ago according to Lazarus.
  On the other hand, Ghazar Parpetsi knows correctly the kings who ruled during the time of Sahak and Mashtots, two Vrams, two Hazkerts, with whom Koryun agrees, to whom Lazar refers for the second time with the same respect.
  So why does he deviate from Koryun by putting the invention of letters in the IV century?
  Perhaps Lazarus's historiographical plan envisaged the early reign of King Vramshapuh ... Most likely, based on the original plan and concept of Lazarus's mashtots, it should be said that he was not disturbed by these historical-chronological data, the main thing for him was the reassessment of Mashtots, Sahak and Vramshapuhi , which he has achieved.
  Therefore, he was satisfied with putting Vramshapuhi only in the time of Shapuhi, the early time of the invention, because all these anachronisms are solved, disappear during the indefinite long life given to Sahak and Mashtots, up to Hazkert II, and do not cause any contradiction in the original episode of his "History".
  So, let blessed Koryun stay in his place, Khorenatsi in his place, without mentioning, and the historical principle in his place. Do not increase what is not there, do not reduce what is not there (page 16).
 Here is Ghazar Parpetsi, according to the first episode. a male historian, a "diplomat" who can think one thing, say another and do another, as we have seen in his attitude towards Koryun and his heroes; Thus, it is possible to record with confidence. 1151. The glorification of Sahak Partev was already planned in the order of Ghazar Parpetsi's "History".
 2. Sahak was glorified by equating him with the greatness of Gregory the Illuminator and "humiliating" Mashtots's case.
 3. The original of Parpetsi's Mashtots is not insignificant and in its turn proves that there was no Mashtots in Khorenatsi's "History".
 4. The editor of Khorenatsi's "History" Vaz-VIII centuries used Ghazar Mashtots. definition.
 5. According to Ghazar Parpetsi's "History" Mashtots story, Mashtots did not create a script, but regulated the Daniel signs.
 .
