Asset-backed securities are gradually taking root in the financial markets, presenting themselves as an innovative financing tool.
  Considering the combined and interconnected activities of a number of financial institutional institutions, it cannot be effectively implemented without a proper legislative framework.
  It is no coincidence that in the United States, which has historically been home to asset securities exchanges, more than 20 dozen legislative reforms have been made over the past three decades to mortgage securities1.
  And even such legislative measures could not prevent 2008-2010. The global financial crisis, which by the way arose in the US mortgage market and then became systemic.
 However, the lessons of the global financial and economic crisis have given new impetus to asset securitization legislation, and it is in the US debt market that the share of asset-backed securities has increased over the past thirty years (see Figure 1).
  Only, during the financial and economic crisis, that growth slowed down a bit, but in the post-crisis years, the share of bonds in the debt market increased again, already making about 40%.
  Naturally, such confidence of the securities market in bonds was essentially conditioned by the existence of current legislative norms.
 249 ECONOMICS And it was not only in the United States that the market showed significant interest in asset-backed securities.
  Figure 2 shows a number of countries whose gross domestic product assets have a significant weight, which indicates sufficient legislative provisions in this area.
 Figure 1. Dynamics of the share of bonds in the US debt market 2 In the Republic of Armenia, the legal framework for asset securitization has also been established in the last decade.
  Currently, the RA Law on Asset Securitization and Asset-Assured Securities is in force, which regulates the relations related to the issuance of asset-backed securities and control over this complex process3.
  However, before that, securitization in our country is a reflection of the RA Law on Asset Securitization and Assets Secured by Assets, 2008, Art. He found 1,250 ECONOMICS in the RA Civil Code, the RA Law on the Securities Market and a number of decisions of the RA Government.
 Figure 2 Asset-backed securities / GDP ratio in 2016, in percentage 4 Thus, the RA Civil Code states that a security is a document certifying property rights, the implementation or transfer of which is possible only when it is submitted5.
  However, introducing the types of securities in the Code, the 6 general provisions do not specifically specify the characteristics of securities insured with assets.
  The article "Bonds" is presented on the same principle, where the security is described as a document certifying the right of the holder, the nominal value of the security to be received from the issuer of the bond within the specified terms or other property equivalent.
  In fact, the bondholder has the right to receive interest or property rights on the face value 7.
 RA Civil Code, 1998, art. 146 Ibid., Art. 151 Ibid., Art. 154 251 ECONOMICS Chapter 8 of the RA Civil Code is entirely devoted to securities and mainly includes general provisions, and the process of issuance and placement of securities in our country is regulated by the RA Law on Securities Market, the main goals of which are "protection of investors' rights and legal interests. Ensuring transparency, stable and efficient development of the securities market, ensuring the credibility of the securities pricing system, reducing systemic risks in the securities market ”8.
  However, this law also does not provide specific comments on the securitization of assets.
 Thus, the third section of the law is entirely devoted to the regulation of investment services, and is mainly aimed at the control of investment processes by the Central Bank of Armenia and the prevention of financial risks.
  The Law on Registration and Licensing of Investment Organizations (Articles 33-46), Professional Qualifications (Articles 50-53), as well as the requirements for the activities of investment service providers (Articles 62-80) received the most comments.
 The transparency of transactions in the market becomes a subject of special regulation in the RA Law on Securities Market.
  In particular, there is a requirement to issue a prospectus when issuing and placing securities, which should contain complete information about the issuer and the offered securities, which will be sufficient for the holder to make a sound assessment of his securities rights9.
  Moreover, the requirements for the form and content of the prospectus are defined by the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia, when the Law of the Republic of Armenia “On Securities Market”, 2007, Art. 1 Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Securities Market", 2007, art. 8, item 1 252 ECONOMICS different requirements for the form and content of the prospectus, depending on the type of securities offered 10.
 At the same time, the law does not set out the requirements for securities, particularly asset-backed prospectuses, which would relate to the availability of insurance or rating.
  Moreover, according to the law, the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia is not actually responsible for the accuracy or reliability of the information included in the prospectus.
 In this regard, the law requires the prospectus to include a provision stating that its registration by the Central Bank does not guarantee the security of the investment, the accuracy or veracity of the information provided11.
 It seemed that the above-mentioned legislative amendments should have been included in the RA Law on Asset Securitization and Assets Secured by Assets, the adoption of which followed the RA Law on Securities Market, but in our opinion, there is still a need for reforms in this legislative field.
 Thus, the law does not require homogeneity of the group of assets being securitized and only emphasizes the fact that at the time of sale of the assets to the securitization fund those assets will not be encumbered by the rights and claims of third parties and will be free from any restrictions12.
  However, we believe that the existence of homosexuality should be a legal requirement especially when forming the "stage" of assets, as the group of assets providing similar cash inflows forms stable financial resources for the timely and complete repayment of bonds.
 RA Law on Securities Market, 2007, art. 8, point 4 Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Securities Market", 2007, art. 10, item 6 Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Asset Securitization and Securities Secured by Assets", 2008, Article 23 253 ECONOMICS Moreover, according to Article 24 of this law, the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia registers an asset group, requesting a list of necessary documents from the securitization fund.
  However, in the list of documents, the documents certifying the defined ownership transferred to the securitization fund over the included assets 13 are more important13.
 In our opinion, in parallel with that, in the RA Law on Asset Securitization and Assets Secured by Assets, it is necessary to clarify the conditions ensuring the attractiveness of securitization.
  Thus, there is no requirement for public attractiveness of securities assets under Article 31 կետ 1, merely stating that credit attractiveness may be provided by the initiator or seller of the securities secured by the assets, as well as other persons.
 In addition, the law addresses the scope of attractiveness in terms of creating a reserve for payments on securities secured by assets, insurance of assets, guarantees of fulfillment of the obligation to pay on secured assets on market terms, 14 but, at the same time, there is no legal rating for securities sold.
 In general, the current legislation of the Republic of Armenia refers to the significance and risks of the attractiveness of securities, noting that the means of attractiveness should not endanger the interests of investors15, but the law does not specify in which cases "endangering the interests of investors" should be registered.
  Probably, the RA Law on the Securities Market addresses this issue in general terms, where it is stated that the presentation of information in the prospectus should not significantly damage the issuer's law. Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Asset Securitization and Secured Assets", Article 31 of the Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Asset Securitization and Secured Assets", 2008, Article 32, Clause 2 254 ECONOMICS in this case, when making an assessment of the current and future financial condition or the rights secured by the offered securities16.
 In our opinion, in this case, the law provides general requirements for investors to provide information, but not targeted to their interests.
 The regulation of the asset securitization process is somewhat referred to in the RA Government documents.
  Thus, in 2013, the Government of the Republic of Armenia made the issue of significantly increasing the availability of financial resources for the real sector of the economy a subject of discussion, envisaging the adoption of a relevant concept17.
  In addition, Minutes No. 47 of the November 14, 2013 sitting of the Government of the Republic of Armenia enshrined the decision to approve the concept and action plan for increasing the availability of financial resources for the real sector of the economy18.
 Clause 10 of the document provides for the promotion of stocks and bonds by local companies, and Clause 12 refers to the regulation of issues related to the next pledge.
  In practice, in the absence of additional property values, it is necessary to pledge the already pledged property, for which, according to the current legislation, the consent of the initial creditor organization (pledgee) is a mandatory condition.
  This legislative norm is also applicable in the conditions of asset securitization.
  However, since this decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia is about approving the action plan, the RA Law on the Securities Market, 2007, Article 8, point 5, sub-point 2 of the Government of the Republic of Armenia, 2013 Item 58 of Annex 2 to the Decision N 800-N of July 18, 2013 "Decision on Approval of the Concept for Increasing the Access to Financial Resources and Action Plan" for the Real Sector of the Economy of the Government of the Republic of Armenia November 14, 2013 Protocol No. 25 255 ECONOMICS do not receive assets by-laws of securitization processes.
 The RA legislation also does not envisage economic incentives for the asset securitization process, in the case when, for example, the 2030 mortgage valuation strategy in the Russian Federation envisages progressive application of securities profits.
 .
