The term "diplomacy" was first used in England in 1645.
  The classic form of diplomacy is the Italian model, which was formed on the basis of interstate trade in 1648, after the signing of the Treaty of Westphalia by the German Empire.
  According to it, the Thirty Years' War ended, the hundred-year-old ecclesiastical (confessional) conflict in Europe ended, the legal bases of the European system of international relations and their nature were defined.
  It took another whole century for the term "diplomacy" to be used in scientific and cultural-political contacts.
 [2:
 с. 63-72] There is a correlation between economic diplomacy and diplomacy, as traditional economics with all its means, methods and arsenal of tricks serves as the basis for 21 ECONOMICS of economic diplomacy.
 Economic diplomacy did not arise at once either.
  It took millennia, during which it became an independent theoretical and practical field of international relations.
 Economic diplomacy is a special, priority field of diplomacy.
  The country's economic diplomacy clearly reflects the directions of its foreign economic policy and the economic interests it pursues for both state-owned and foreign-owned enterprises.
 In the current globalization, any entrepreneur strives to expand its activities in the international arena and maximize the amount of profit, and the achievements of the country as a result of economic diplomacy greatly contribute to that.
 [1:
  с.124-139] One of the goals of economic diplomacy is to protect the country's economic interests in the world economic arena, one of its tasks is to provide favorable conditions for the country and its entrepreneurs and effective international economic interaction.
  The traditional methods of diplomacy are mainly used to support national business in the world economy, in particular, consultations and discussions, exchange of views, announcements, participation in international organizations, etc.
 In economic diplomacy, mastering the art of negotiation is extremely important from the point of view of managing conflicts in economic relations, reaching agreements, and implementing mutually beneficial cooperation.
 ECONOMICS The main way to reach mutually beneficial agreements is to make concessions. Only conscious concessions are a way to reach established agreements and arrangements, of course, concessions must be mutual.
 Economic diplomacy is facilitated by: 1. Internationalization, integration and globalization of the world economic system 2. Transnational corporations 3. Globalization enhances the role of economic diplomacy 4. Introduction of progressive management methods Creating conditions for innovation in the country's economy contributes to the country's prestige.
 Armenia attaches great importance to the development of bilateral relations with different countries of the world and having normal relations with neighboring countries.
 The rates of development of the RA economy are conditioned by the limited resources of Armenia and unfavorable geopolitical realities.
  Being a small economy, having no access to the sea, energy resources, and partly being in a land blockade, the created unfavorable realities force us to be more active and vigilant to use even the smallest opportunities for economic development.
  And the active, purposeful application of economic diplomacy tools and the development of appropriate strategies can open a wide range of opportunities.
 The modern mission of economic diplomacy is to create favorable conditions for the distribution of domestic goods to foreign markets, to protect the country's economic interests abroad, to promote the country's socio-economic development, to promote its competitiveness in the world, to ensure its security.
 The country's competent economic diplomacy provides an opportunity to enjoy the benefits of conducting international business.
 Like every state, the Republic of Armenia attaches importance to its economic diplomacy.
  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is trying to increase the economic component through its diplomatic missions and embassies.
 Some steps have been taken by Armenia, but unfortunately, no matter how much the government tries to present Armenia as an attractive country to the world in terms of economic investments, life shows that without the introduction of new tools used to achieve this goal, it is impossible to achieve serious results.
 Armenian embassies should have a clear idea of ​​the markets and economies of their countries, have some information about the companies that can be potential investors.
  It is also important to expand economic relations by signing international agreements, our embassies have serious work to do in this area.
 At present, Armenia is interested in and actively cooperates with the European Union, as well as within the framework of the Eurasian Economic Union, as a full member tries to gain economic benefits by using the tools and mechanisms of economic diplomacy.
 However, today there are a number of internal problems in Armenia, which hinder the achievement of full results in the field of economic diplomacy, in particular, Armenia does not have a competitive national economy, that is, we do not give or export to world markets a product that could compete with famous brands.
  It can be said that we will set a task for a foreign employer to do all this on its own, to pave the way for Armenia, only promising it cheap labor.
  The problem, however, is that cheap labor is offered by many, many countries today and from a much more favorable position than Armenia.
  As a result, our attempts to develop the national economy by others are not fully realized, as the country offers the potential investor nothing but problems.
  Along with this, the geopolitical factor, tax policy and a number of other factors also have their influence.
  Therefore, even if the Armenian diplomats are endowed with the deepest diplomatic knowledge and skills, it is not realistic to expect great results until the internal problems are solved.
 .
