The concept of quality varies depending on the expectations of consumers.
  It is the compliance with the requirements and expectations of consumers, a set of features and characteristics that determine the ability of a product or service to meet that demand.
 Quality can be defined as a dynamic state that is interconnected with products, services, people, processes and environments that exceeds expectations and contributes to value creation ”[1; 99-100].
 GOVERNANCE Quality management, on the other hand, can be defined as the process of controlling all necessary actions and steps necessary to maintain the desired level of "excellence".
  It includes the definition of quality policy, quality planning and assurance, implementation, control and continuous improvement1.
 In this context, from the point of view of maintaining the desired level of "excellence", it is not difficult to see that people play a significant role, as the quality chain starts from identifying consumers' needs to their feedback, where the role is human, be it product, service or Consumer, decisive and key (Figure 1).
 Figure 1. Consumers and the quality chain 2 Definition by author.
 The diagram was developed by the author.
 220 MANAGEMENT Thus, the role of people in the quality management system can be represented by three links: 1. Management link, 2. Employees, 3. Consumers.
 Schematically it has the shape of a triangle / Figure 2 / [2; 73-75].
  The three vertices of the triangle represent the processes in quality management of people and their relationships: 1. External marketing - the organization makes promises to consumers, 2. Interactive marketing - staff fulfills promises, 3. Internal marketing - the relationship between the management and staff of the organization .
 The connection between the organization and its customers is called the external marketing process.
  In external marketing, the organization makes promises to its customers about offers and their implementation [3; 24-30].
  These promises are made during advertisements or promotions and create certain expectations for consumers about the goods or services.
  They can have a positive or negative effect on consumer expectations, differences between quality expectations (expected, potential level) and actual, current quality levels.
 For organizations, factors such as staff, organizational image, visible structures, as well as all processes of production of goods or provision of services, form the basis for consumer expectations.
  After comparing the expectations of the consumers and the reality, the final opinion of the consumer towards the product is formed through the environment where they receive that product, as well as through the characters and behavior of the people providing the services.
 221 MANAGEMENT Management link Internal marketing Fulfillment of promises External marketing Fulfillment of promises Staff Consumers Interactive marketing Keeping promises Promise 2. People in quality management system 3 Interactive, two-way marketing involves keeping the promises made by the organization to consumers.
  Interactive marketing is the real communication between the staff of the organization and the consumers, which is called "truth moment" or service process, situation.
 This is a crucial moment where companies show that they can meet consumer expectations.
  Interactive marketing plays a very important role in building relationships between the organization and consumers.
  The staff of the organization is in constant interaction with the customers, as a result of which it can be said that the skills, knowledge, attitude and behavior of the staff affect the perception of quality by consumers.
 Internal marketing is the training of staff who communicate directly with customers and increase efficiency, as well as the training of the entire staff to work together and ensure customer satisfaction.
  Internal marketing means that companies need to pay more attention. The chart was developed by the author.
 222 MANAGEMENT on staff quality.
  In fact, internal marketing should precede external marketing.
  In this context, leadership, staff motivation and positive relationships with the top management, the moral and psychological environment and the values ​​that the staff carries as a link representing the organization are also very important.
  It does not make sense to advertise the highest quality until the staff has achieved its implementation and maintenance.
 Thus, from the point of view of maintaining the desired level of quality management and "excellence", it is necessary to consider the peculiarities of leadership in that context and the resulting motivation, continuous development and teamwork and the relationship between them within the organization.
 Leadership can be defined as the formation and provision of a vision within the organization by the leader and the environment that motivates staff to achieve the organization's goals while allowing staff to accomplish them through their skills and to see their own well-being in those efforts4.
 Leadership in terms of quality management has its own characteristics and principles [4; 78-82]: 1. Process harmonization and focus on the goal, 2. Focus not only on the end result, but also on the processes, 3. Motivation of individuals.
 Actual leadership, in contrast to the current management model, should enable the achievement of the organization's goals, while emphasizing the coordination and harmonization of processes on the way to their implementation, and in the meantime the achievement of the main goal of the organization should be the priority.
 223 MANAGEMENT Making a profit, but the correct organization of processes along the way.
  It presupposes the correct division and delegation of work, a clear understanding of the processes and the provision of consistent work between each link.
  In this case, it is possible to ensure complete quality management within the organization.
 In many organizations, where the leadership system is not clearly functioning, and the organization is guided only by the principle of formal management, control and management become key functions of the organization (Figure 3).
 Supervision Management Figure 3. Traditional control hierarchy 5 Figure developed by the author.
 GOVERNANCE Meanwhile, leadership in terms of quality management presupposes participation, support and involvement.
  It is manifested in: - In the decision-making process with the participation of the staff, when the participation and opinion of the relevant specialists are important from the point of view of decision-making, and not the decisions are made and concentrated in one circle.
  This allows you to avoid possible risks, to properly organize the activities of the organization and to use the resources efficiently.
 - Teamwork, which allows to overcome the complexity of the work, to ensure cooperation within the team, a healthy moral and psychological environment, communication and understanding, as well as social interaction on the right foundations.
 Organizations with a hierarchical approach to leadership and support in addition to the traditional management hierarchy (Figure 4) provide the best results in terms of quality.
  In this case, the correct definition of the mission and vision by the leader is important and at the same time gives everyone the opportunity to participate in the processes according to their field of activity, there is constant support from the leaders.
 Motivation is also one of the characteristics and principles of leadership from the point of view of quality management.
  Modern theories of motivation and leadership and their practical application have proven that financial support, including salary, is not a sufficient tool to motivate staff.
  The theories of Maslow's hierarchy of needs, Alderfer's ERG, McCland's theory of needs [5] best reflect the cases in which individuals strive for self-expression and self-expression.
  There are many cases when individuals who do not fully meet the physiological and other basic needs try more to satisfy the needs of self-expression and self-expression.
 Practically, they are also visible in Western management, when in 225 GOVERNANCE people living in materially and socially well-off environments experience high levels of stress, depression and decreased motivation.
 Assistance in Defining Mission and Vision Figure 4. Hierarchy of Leadership and Support 6 In addition, the process theories of motivation [6] (theories of skin support, Wright equation, Adams equality, Loki goal setting, etc.) demonstrate the need for leadership from a motivational point of view. In turn, it is one of the most important preconditions for quality assurance.
 In the context of motivation, the opportunities for staff education, training and retraining are also very important from the point of view of self-expression and continuous development.
  The task of true leaders is to identify and make the best use of each employee's knowledge, skills and talents to achieve the goals of the organization.
  In fact, it assumes that the diagram was developed by the author.
 MANAGEMENT Selection of "right people / staff" by "right people / leaders" and continuous skills and knowledge development of the latter / Figure 5 / [7; 79-80].
 Attitude Judgments Abilities Knowledge Figure 5. Stages of staff knowledge and skills development Each individual's initial knowledge allows them to develop certain skills, which, based on experience gained over time, develop into judgments and then attitudes about this or that phenomenon, situation.
  It is of a constant nature, because the individual realizes the lack of this or that knowledge as a result of his experience, judgments and attitude.
  The leader's task is to identify the 4 main levels of training for each employee at different stages of work experience:  Unconscious disability,  Conscious disability,  Conscious ability,  Unconscious ability.
 In terms of quality, the organizations whose leaders ensure the continuous development and training of the staff succeed.
 In fact, leadership is very important to ensure the desired level of quality "excellence", which is manifested in the correct definition of goals, voice in process management, staff participation in decision-making processes, teamwork, leadership support, motivation, continuous development and training. .
 .
