Within the general patterns of the development of modern civilization, transformations take place that make the development of social systems more alternative, paradoxical and unpredictable.
  Modern social systems are characterized by "strange" fluctuations in behavior (fluctuations), "bifurcation" tendencies (bifurcation) and crisis manifestations.
  As a result of all this, the once unequivocal social world evokes misunderstandings and different conceptual approaches, which require a new explanation and interpretation of the well-known patterns and principles of the development, reproduction and operation of social systems.
 The inherent instability and unpredictability of liberal-democratic societies, the development of alternatives, analysis and the development of a modern concept of philosophical understanding of history.
 The paradoxes inherent in social systems acquire a special resonance in the stages of systemic transformations, which have both structural and alternative descriptions.
  In professional literature, the term paradox was coined by the Stoics, which meant original views.
  It is of Greek origin and means unexpected, strange, unusual, with a literal interpretation - "contradictory opinion".
  Judgments are often paradoxical, which, in fact, being true contradict the existing views and that is why they seemed strange [6, c. 51].
  The paradoxes of logical, mathematical, linguistic or so-called set theory are better known in scientific circles.
  And social paradoxes are discussed in the Kantian sense as a reflection of different understandings of the same social phenomena.
 The need for conceptual analysis of social paradoxes and misunderstandings of the same social phenomena arises especially in the stages of civilizational development, when the context of social activity of people's lives loses its former stability and certainty and processes become natural and unpredictable.
  Moreover, although social paradoxes and misunderstandings are natural consequences of human activity, they, as a rule, become massive, especially in the stages of systemic transformations.
  Para 284 PHILOSOPHY Dox is that in the previous society, the more the conventions limited the social activity of a person, the more they contributed to the increase of civic activity.
 Representative of the Frankfurt School Yu. According to Habermas, who has devoted all his activities to the introduction of the preconditions of open and free telecommunication in the society, he is skeptical about the increase in the quantity of information, noticing that does "always" mean "good", maybe the opposite?
  In this case, the question arises as to what information is necessary for the formation of a democratic society [9, p.177].
 In the conditions of modern dramatic relations, a person does not show great inclinations to establish himself in the political sphere.
  This is a dangerous tendency, because, as Aristotle once observed, man is either alive or a god outside of social and political relations.
  In the context of this presupposition, which is of fundamental methodological importance, a new scientific and practical resonance is given to the spatial-temporal properties of socio-cultural paradoxes and the emergence and manifestation of social, economic and political spheres, the paradoxical and contradictory principles operating in them. irrational consequences, freedom and liberty, order and chaos, globalization and tendencies of national sovereignty, etc.) socio-philosophical analysis of problems.
  The analysis of socio-cultural paradoxes was carried out in the context of the study of such principles as the contradiction of rationality, the transformation of social systems into chaos presupposing regularity, the replacement of the purpose of social reality with expediency, and so on.
  At the same time it is mentioned that by saying paradox it means not only contradiction, 285 PHILOSOPHY but also misunderstanding.
  This series of questions proves that this analysis is up-to-date, little researched and in that sense innovative.
  Moreover, at the present stage of the development of civilization, the causes and consequences of paradoxical manifestations are discussed in the context of the paradigms that characterize the classical picture of the world, the crisis and transformations of the presuppositions of historical rationality.
 The systemic transformations of modern civilization, which take place not only in the main spheres and structures of social systems, but also in a number of socio-psychological and cultural formations typical of social subjects, are of key importance for the further development of society.
  As a result of these transformations, the feeling of uncertainty and anxiety is growing, as the shadowy aspects of socio-cultural transformations and possible social accidents and their consequences are revealed day by day.
  Therefore, in this context, the interpretation of socio-cultural paradoxes becomes one of the most important issues.
  The problems can be formulated in the form of the following questions: 1) Are socio-cultural paradoxes new phenomena or are they specific to human history and only manifested in a new way? 2) What is the nature or intensity of socio-cultural paradoxes during the stages of systemic transformation?
 Modern societies face two problems. on the one hand, to get rid of the former systemic characteristics and their typical socio-cultural bases, on the other hand, to be involved in modern world processes.
 Most people are concerned about the modern social environment, where there are constant processes of individualization and standardization, especially what is the social perspective of man in the stage of systemic transformation, and where is humanity going? .
 These questions prove once again that the internal transformations inherent in sociocultural systems and the 286 PHILOSOPHY understandings, the sensitivity to external stimuli, the existence of alternative development opportunities, and other similar factors make the prospect of exploring socio-cultural paradoxes urgent and relevant.
 The paradigms inherent in modern Western civilization have, by their very nature, shaken the foundations of some institutions that maintain social order, and this fact requires a new interpretation and reinterpretation of the paradoxical consequences and misunderstandings of civilizational developments.
 The modern stage of systemic transformations was formed under the veil of the Enlightenment ideas, which emphasized the factor of de-sanctification and de-religiousization of social life [3, 345-415].
  The purpose of all this was to instill in the society the belief in rational actions in all spheres of social life with the help of reason, science, etc.
  But the rationalization of the social world did not presuppose the growth of universal knowledge, but merely proved that there are absolutely no secret, unpredictable ideas invading human life, and that man can in principle master the world of things by rational calculation.
  Modern-day thinkers believed that in order to dominate the future, it was necessary to get rid of the habits and prejudices of the past and use the opportunities provided by science and technology to make the world more predictable and orderly.
  It should be noted, however, that the modern world does not correspond to those predictions, goals and ideals.
  Moreover, modern civilization has noticeably deviated from the set path and the current tendencies of the development of civilization are not only unpredictable and manageable, but also have gone out of the way of general control and development and have posed serious dangers of self-destruction.
 Moreover, in researches and analyzes reflecting the logic of modern transformations, 287 PHILOSOPHY is a tendency to simplify and impoverish the content and functions of socio-cultural paradoxes.
 Programming and calculating the reconstruction of social systems is a very difficult task, because, unlike natural systems, the latter respond more actively to changes, which in turn leads to deviation from the intended purpose, unplanned changes in the same system.
  It is the socio-philosophical analysis of socio-cultural paradoxes and misunderstandings at the stage of radical and systemic transformations, which requires revealing and analyzing the role of sociocultural motives in the processes of paradox formation and existence, when the social system seeks the new.
  The study of paradoxes in societies characterized by socio-cultural uncertainty, alternativeness, duality and contradiction implies a number of problems.
  Although radical transformations of social systems are carried out in a planned and purposeful way, and they derive from the internal patterns of development of the given system, nevertheless, any transformation and any social process is internally paradoxical and causes misunderstandings.
  The emergence of the latter, along with other objective issues, reflects the "emergency" situation in those societies [7, c.51], as well as the existence of alternative opportunities to overcome the above-mentioned phenomena.
 Each society creates its own socio-cultural values ​​and their corresponding value system.
  From that point of view, the idea is put forward that throughout history a person sets different social goals and tries to achieve them at any cost.
  Such an ideal is considered to be the formation of a multifaceted, harmonious individual, while the result is an economically-centered person whose life and motives are characterized by a pronounced market nature.
  Mankind has always set itself the task of fighting for such a fundamental value as freedom.
  However, after receiving it, he does not know how to use it, so he escapes from freedom.
  In other words, a person cannot live without free self-realization, but he does not want to live under the care of freedom.
  This was especially manifested in the consumer society. Summarizing the results of these changes, Ortega-i-Gasset singles out two main features of modern human psychology: a) unbridled growth of vital desires, b) ungrateful attitude towards everything, due to which they began to live better.
  The reason for this unique paradox is that in the new conditions, people, on the one hand, gain real opportunities for a prosperous life, on the other hand, this rapidly changing reality no longer fits within the framework of previous values, traditions and moral norms.
  Guided by the dictates of personal well-being, the masses, at the same time, lose their sense of gratitude for the sources of well-being [8,46].
 Analyzing modernity from historical and civilizational perspectives and addressing its political (sovereignty, human rights, rule of law, etc.) and economic (competition, market relations, free enterprise, etc.) institutions, this analysis reflected the socio-cultural life of modern civilization. transformations (demagoguery, rationalization of social actions, cultural formation, etc.), as a result of which socio-cultural understandings are also changed and acquire new functions.
 In the conditions of modernization of information relations, socio-cultural understandings are transformed into social phenomena, which are characterized by mosaicism, alternativeness, dilemma, etc.
  In connection with this 289 PHILOSOPHY, the author viewed the misunderstandings of modern man-made civilization in terms that enabled modern achievements, on the one hand, to be seen as concrete manifestations of misunderstandings, on the other hand, as effective mechanisms of social influence through which socio-political manipulation is formed. man [4, c.34].
 As the modern processes of civilization show, the tendencies of the development of the society are divided, going through the ways of consolidation and, at the same time, separation.
  On the one hand, due to the development of public relations, as well as with the introduction of a new type of media, the world acquires a complete and unified nature.
  The level of awareness of universal human needs begins to grow, which acquires unifying, centrist qualities.
 On the other hand, as a result of raising the level of national and individual self-consciousness, social societies are divided and fragmented, which speaks of the existence of decentralizing, separating, centrifugal phenomena, which are manifested in various paradoxes and contradictions in public life.
 On the one hand, the culture of organizing public life requires creative activity and ingenuity from a person, and on the other hand, it makes him an attachment to institutional structures and technology.
  Each society creates its own socio-cultural values ​​and their corresponding ideology.
  Thus, modern civilization is based on the economic-centered man, whose motives characterizing his life and way of life have a pronounced market nature [2, p. 139].
 Manifestations of socio-cultural alternatives and uncertainty in the interactions of social communities, groups and structures become one of the main reasons for the existence of social paradoxes.
  Predictability of the social life of the society as a social 290 PHILOSOPHY included in it is a consequence of the interactions and actions of the subjects, makes possible the harmony and proportion between the social expectations and the possibilities and means of their realization.
  However, systemic socio-cultural transformations fundamentally change the essential characteristics of social life, endowing it with features of unpredictability and risk-taking.
  The understanding of socio-cultural paradoxes in the context of systemic transformations provided an opportunity to analyze and reinterpret the existing and future boundaries of socio-philosophical questions and research.
  In the modern era, the means of governing society and regulating human relations are constantly undergoing changes.
  The goal of the transition from traditional closed societies to liberal-democratic societies and the socio-economic, political and spiritual transformations taking place in Western civilization is to program people's behavior and put it in the desired direction.
  In closed societies, the government does not have a great need to influence the consciousness of the people and establish its legitimacy, because it is predetermined.
  In modern democracies, on the other hand, in order to control people's views and beliefs, the authorities have to use more liberal mechanisms of mass inspiration, one of the goals of which is to reduce civic activism.
 In the stage of systemic transformations, it is important to take into account the importance of such serious factors in the society, such as the ways of putting the relations of different social classes and strata in a common path, the changes in their moral and psychological perceptions of things and phenomena, etc.
  That is, socio-cultural duality also leads to a change in the value system.
  For example, people living under administrative and totalitarian regimes value life, things and phenomena from a different perspective, people living in a democratic legal system are different.
  Therefore, in the social space characterized by two different dimensions, it is necessary to analyze the causes and peculiarities of the emergence of political paradoxes.
  Political paradoxes are considered normal processes.
  In the professional literature, political paradoxes are considered the results of both evolutionary and revolutionary changes, which are motivated by structural factors and are operational and non-operational consequences of transformations.
  Individuals and groups that pursue their own interests are the source of political paradoxes [1, p. 15].
  Political paradoxes are one of the natural and inevitable factors in the development of society, without which the interaction between the structural elements of the social system would be absent or would receive a linear description.
  Where there are people pursuing different interests, interests and needs, there are also misunderstandings, because a society can never exist without contradictions, opposite interests and ideas, different demands.
  It is difficult to imagine a situation when there is absolute unanimity in the society, the same interests and ideas, abilities, capacities, which gives grounds to claim that there will always be paradoxes in the society.
  Paradoxes, being socio-political phenomena, are typical of any society and underlie political processes.
  Therefore, analyzing the development trends of postmodernism and transforming societies, it can be concluded that during the life of liberalism and democracy, social contradictions appear, in connection with which paradigms of dialogue and cooperation are developed.
  Meanwhile, in order to effectively develop the cultural contacts and cooperation expected by many humanists, it is necessary to implement the principle of tolerance in terms of different attitudes, values, norms, stereotypes 292 PHILOSOPHY.
  The requirement to formulate this principle is not at all abstract imperative, but stems from the analysis of universal processes.
 .
