New knowledge in various fields of medicine has necessitated the expansion and refinement of relevant scientific methods.
  In accordance with each of the scientific knowledge, methods and theories formed in a specific period, three models of the scientific image of the world are distinguished: classical (mechanical) image of the world, non-classical (quantum relativistic) image of the world and post-non-classical (synergetic) paradigm.
  The notion of paradigm has been put into practice in the current post-positivist philosophy 482 PHILOSOPHY index T. Kun.
  The paradigm expresses the set of methods, beliefs, values, technical means that are typical of the scientific community and are used by it to solve specific scientific problems.
 In both theoretical and practical fields of medicine, the dialectical approach is mostly used, which contributes to the objective and comprehensive study of research, quantitative and qualitative analysis of the functions in the human body.
  This approach contributes to the analysis (analysis) and combination (synthesis) of facts, modeling a specific situation and systemic thinking.
  Medicine, more than any other science, needs a comprehensive, complete analysis of phenomena and processes.
  It is necessary for the doctor, first of all, to reveal the connection between the development of the disease and the changes taking place in the organism, to reveal the essence of the pathological processes.
  Dialectics has developed the most important principles of the rationalist method, which more accurately express the processes taking place in the human body.
 According to the dialectical approach, the essence of natural phenomena and processes can be revealed in conjunction with the discovery of their external connections and relationships.
 The approaches of medicine reveal the sequence of stages of origin and development of pathological processes in the human body.
  However, it should be taken into account that the general principles of medicine reveal only the most general, "typical" aspects of the nature of the disease and to some extent ignore the individual features of the development of the disease.
  In particular, the etiology of the disease and the pathogenesis (1, p. 17) express the regular nature of the development and resolution of the disease.
  The sequence of the main stages of the disease is also regular.
 The general principles of medicine reveal the stable, permanent connections that are characteristic of the development of all diseases.
  Special laws are specific to certain diseases 483 PHILOSOPHY, and private laws are specific to the specific forms of development of certain diseases by specifying the conditions.
  The above laws are interrelated.
 The general principles of medicine are private in nature, unique, typical, and the dialectical ones are general.
  Just as the general is expressed in the singular, so are the peculiarities of dialectical approaches expressed in the principles of medicine.
 The three basic principles of dialectics - the principles of unity and struggle of opposites, the principles of quantitative and qualitative change and the negation of negation - operate in all parts of reality, in processes, in phenomena.
 Based on these principles, "subjective dialectics" in general and the dialectical thinking of the doctor in particular are formed in the human consciousness.
  "Subjective dialectics" is a method of knowledge, according to which cognition is an evolving process, which takes place in accordance with the basic principles of dialectics.
 The law of struggle and unity is the core of dialectics.
  It reveals the internal source of self-movement and self-development in the living system.
  The driving force of any development is the existence of contradictions, their struggle and overcoming.
  Examples of the struggle and unity of contradictions are quantity and quality, cause and effect, necessity and chance, part and whole, form and content, and so on.
  The law of conflict and unity has the following significance for medicine: it guides the researcher to find the reasons for the development of a healthy and diseased organism.
 One of the most important methodological principles of medicine is the opposition between the nature of the disease, pathological processes and, on the other hand, the knowledge of the origin and specific mechanisms of treatment.
  Pavlov mentioned. "In order to understand the disease correctly, you must be able to distinguish 484 PHILOSOPHY what is the result of the injury and what is the result of the organism's resistance to the given injury" [2, p. 421].
 The processes taking place in the organism are the manifestations of the law of struggle of contradictions, hidden or overt.
  For example, inflammation is a complex and controversial process that can be not only pathological but also protective.
  At the same time, the positive effect of inflammation can be transformed into its opposite.
  During the disease, the body reacts to the "pathogenesis" of the fracture and the "sanogenesis" defense.
  Due to the internal contradiction of the disease, they are at the same time connected with each other and exclude each other.
  The combination of harmful and protective reactions of the organism can be considered as a combination of opposites.
  Moreover, the same function can be manifested both as a protective and as a pathological process.
  For example, fibrinolysis can be considered as a protective, adaptive mechanism that helps to eliminate fibrin accumulations and restore the process of pumping blood.
  However, the intensity of fibrinolysis, which occurs as an adaptive reaction in the case of intravascular blood coagulation, leads to afibriogenic and pathological bleeding.
  Thus, an adaptive reaction ceases to be defensive and becomes harmful.
 The law of quantitative-qualitative changes is inextricably linked with the law of struggle of contradictions and unity.
  It reveals the internal mechanism of development and answers the question of how that development takes place.
 Quantitative analysis of the disease is based on the differentiation of the disease and the nasological classification.
  Quality is the relatively stable, essential certainty of things and phenomena.
  The development of medicine leads to a more comprehensive study of both qualitative and quantitative features of the studied processes.
  Thus, until the middle of the 19th century, the emphasis in medicine was on the qualitative side of the processes being studied, but it is impossible to understand them without studying the quantitative characteristics of 485 PHILOSOPHY.
  The methodological significance of the principle of quantitative and qualitative changes is the discovery of quantitative characteristics in qualitatively new phenomena and processes.
  The transition from quantitative to qualitative changes depends on the specific conditions of the organism.
  There are many transitional and intermediate stages between illness and health.
  These transitions are more characterized by the phrase "not healthy yet, but not sick anymore."
  This condition is called a subclinical condition.
  The transitional stages from physiological to pathological forms, as well as the opposite processes have a deep dialectical nature.
  The physician must always take into account the dialectical regularity, according to which the quantitative changes are continuous and the qualitative ones are intermittent.
  The constantly changing quantitative changes are interrupted at a certain moment by the emergence of a new quality.
 For example, the accumulation of toxins in the body at a certain stage, reaching a quantitative accumulation, leads to decompensation of the system and the emergence of a new clinical condition (coma, death).
  The accumulation of quantitative changes in physiological processes either increases or decreases, but is of a constant nature and, reaching a certain level, causes qualitatively new conditions in the body (for example, disease) [3].
 The principle of negation of negation answers the question in which direction the development takes place.
  This law reveals the objective tendency of the development of nature, society and consciousness.
  The progressive development of this universal tendency.
  The movement from the bottom to the top, from the simple to the complex, excluding what hinders development and preserving and using what promotes development to a new level.
  A correct understanding of this principle contributes to a deep understanding of the dialectical processes taking place in the body.
  For example, every living organism has not only individual but also some characteristic features of its ancestors 486 PHILOSOPHY, which were obtained as a result of a long phylogenetic process.
  Therefore, from the point of view of the law of negation, reproduction can be considered not only as the creation and origin of a new organism from the elements of an old organism, but also as the preservation of old elements in a new organism.
  Each new organism, during ontogeny, absorbs the old elements, which help it to adapt to the environment more flexibly and differently.
  The functional and (morphological) features that the new organism inherits from its ancestors are the basis for adaptation to the environment.
  Physiological and pathological processes are complicated by the ascending complication of evolution.
  Mechnikov noted that if the starfish phagocytosis occurs without the participation of blood vessels and the nervous system, due to their absence, then in higher organisms different organ systems (nervous, immune and endocrine) are involved in the process of inflammation.
 The dialectic reveals the connection and unity of the opposite sides of the objective reality through pairs of categories.
 Parts and whole categories are very important for medicine.
  Everything is the interaction, interconnectedness and unity of phenomena, parts of processes.
  In systems of different levels of reality, the relationships of the whole and the parts are not the same.
  In mechanical systems the parts have some independence from the whole, in biological systems the parts and the whole are closely connected and at the same time the whole has a certain degree of independence.
  The living organism as a whole is more than its constituent parts - cells, tissues, organs.
  According to the dialectical approach, all this is a qualitatively new level, which has arisen as a result of a long evolutionary process.
  Some medical professionals rule out the relative independence of parts (such as cells).
  R. In Vikhrov's works, the relationship between the whole (organism) and parts (cells) is mechanically observed.
  Virkhov Cell React 487 PHILOSOPHY Absolutes relative independence by contrasting them with the integrative and correlation functions of different systems of the organism.
  These dialectical categories in the field of knowledge of living nature always cause contradictions, in particular, between reductionism and integrationism.
  Schelling was still talking about that. "How to understand the whole before the parts, if it presupposes the knowledge of the parts before the whole ..." [4, p. 116] Reductionism, of course, contributes to the development of medical science, but the lack of generalizations of the same particular knowledge in different fields of medicine The grounded theoretical system (thus the lost general pathology) hinders the development of modern medicine. ”
  H. Celien wrote in his work "On the level of the whole organism". "Life is not the sum of its constituent particles ... The more you disintegrate living systems, the more you move away from biology, and in the end only the eternal, sublime, and universal laws of inanimate nature remain."
 In the middle of the XIX century in the field of medicine the dialectical method was supplemented with the theory of systems, which considers disease as a structural-functional systemic process.
  The possibilities of discussing physiological and pathological processes at the subcellular level refuted the notions of "purely functional", "primary functional" changes and "secondary morphological" disorders.
  There are no functional changes that are not due to the corresponding structural disorders.
  The principles of systematics in the field of medicine are expressed in the theory of pathologies as a combination of morphology and physiology.
  The biological structure combines the flexible substrate (object of morphology) and the "formed" process (object of physiology) [1, p. 6].
  For a long time it was considered that in the early stages of the disease the changes of organs and systems do not pass 488 PHILOSOPHY comes from the limits of functional disorders, at the same time the unity of structure and function was accepted.
  Studies in modern biology and medicine, especially molecular biology, biophysics, genetics, allow us to deny the existence of functional diseases and clearly find the morphological substrate corresponding to any dysfunction.
  Thus, the system-functional approach in the field of medicine allows to study the parts, components, processes taking place in the individual organism, the functions of its subsystems, as well as to take into account the integrity of the organism, studying man not as a mechanical sum intertwined with natural-social reality.
 Coincidence and necessity, cause and effect are also among the two categories of dialectics that are important for the methodology of medicine.
  According to the dialectical approach, these categories express the unity of the opposite sides of reality.
  Necessity expresses the general, typical, stable sides of phenomena, chance expresses the unique, superficial and transient sides.
  Causal relationships reveal the necessary connection of phenomena, when the cause precedes the consequence and causes it, with the existence of the appropriate occasion and conditions.
 The principle of causality from the point of view of pathology means that any change in the living system is determined by the material and informational (informational) interactions of the given system and external environmental factors.
  Causation considers the origin (etiology) of the disease as a result of external and internal interactions, ie as a result of the interaction of the organism and the external environment in the presence of certain conditions.
  According to dialectics, there are no coincidences without a reason.
  Any coincidence is a consequence of internally hidden patterns. Further discoveries in quantum physics 489 PHILOSOPHY finally revealed these dialectical notions of universal determinism 1 (determinare in Latin).
  The nature of the dualistic, particle-wave behavior of objects at the atomic-molecular level was revealed.
  According to the dialectical approach, the behavior of simple systems (consisting of one or more particles) is completely predictable in any part of the observation (taking into account causal relationships, conditions and occasions).
  Random, unpredictable manifestations were not observed at all.
  In the second half of the XX century the situation changed.
  Research in various fields of science has led to the discovery of new fundamental laws of living and non-living systems.
  It turned out that chaos and instability can arise from the regulated movement.
  This chaos is fundamentally different from the uncertainty of motion due to external random factors of the determined system.
  It can occur even in simple systems due to non-linearity and instability.
 In the middle of the XIX century the second law of thermodynamics and the evolutionary theory of biology were created at the same time.
  The basic principles of classical thermodynamics are the increase in entropy in closed systems and the law of conservation of energy.
  Evolutionary theory posed an important problem: how to combine thermodynamic processes with the evolution of spontaneously complex biological systems.
 In accordance with the principles of thermodynamics, the closed system moves towards thermal equilibrium, to which the minimum regulation corresponds.
 In the twentieth century, synergy was formed as an interdisciplinary scientific direction, which studies self-organizing systems belonging to different spheres of reality.
  Synergetics, as the starting point of scientific theory, determinism is the doctrine of the universal interconnectedness and interdependence of existence.
  The basis of determinism is the teachings of causality and regularity.
 490 PHILOSOPHY expired in 1973, when the first conference on synergy took place.
  The founders of this teaching are the German physicist Hermann Haken and the founder of the Brussels School of Synergetics Ilya Prigogine.
  Synergetics studies open, non-linear, unstable systems, of which the human body can serve as a vivid example.
 Synergetics is a cross-curricular theory or paradigm of scientific research that examines self-organizing (subsystems), non-closed, that is, open, unstable systems.
  "Living organisms are open, non-enclosed systems that exchange energy and matter with their environment" [6, p. 4].
 In the work "Philosophy of Instability" I. Prigogine explains the transition to a synergetic paradigm in the field of science in a unique way.
  According to him, there is a transition from determinism to instability, instability in some way replaces determinism.
  In the determinist world, natural processes are manageable, subject to our arbitrariness.
  If nature contains instability as an essential element, then we must respect it, because we can not predict what might happen.
  Today science is neither materialistic, nor reductionist, nor deterministic ”[7, p. 52].
 As early as the first half of the twentieth century, Erwin Bauer formulated the "Universal Law of Biology" - all and especially living systems are always in a state of instability and due to their free energy are constantly working against balance.
  Changes in the external environment are compensated and balanced by the organism.
  Based on this principle, the idea of ​​maintaining homeostasis as maintaining internal stability was later formed.
  The scientific paradigm of the Bauer period was based on the principles of classical physics of the late nineteenth century.
  According to the principles of the system of thermodynamics, the only stable state is equilibrium (pause), the living system 491 PHILOSOPHY The captive self-movement was considered a violation of that fundamental paradigm.
  The principle of Bauer constant instability was proved only in 1947 by Prigogine.
  The systemic instability of a living organism, according to Bauer, in contrast to inanimate cells, is proved by the fact that all structures of living cells at the molecular level are pre-charged with excess energy, which is expressed by potential inequality, created by chemical and electrical standards In this area, the gradients are evenly distributed according to the entropy principle.
  Bauer called this excess energy, which exists in living cells of all levels, "structural energy" and described it as instability in the structure of a living molecule.
  Thus the living organism is an open, non-closed and unstable system.
 Therefore, the application of the principles of synergy to the analysis of normal and pathological processes in the human body can be very effective.
 With the help of the scientific apparatus of synergy, the human body can be studied as a complete, open, system of interacting particles.
  It is obvious that any pathological changes in organs and tissues are a source of aggression not only for the organ but also for other organs, disrupting the natural connections between subsystems and organs of the body and creating new pathological connections, the development of which, and consequently the developing nature of the disease. It is almost impossible to predict.
 In order to understand the peculiarities of the synergistic method of researching complex systems, it is necessary to understand the peculiarities of synergetic thinking and the basic concepts with which synergetics operates.
  In general, synergetics is characterized by the following basic concepts: self-organization, non-inclusion, instability.
  Synergetics analyzes open, nonlinear systems, which are all interconnected particles 492 PHILOSOPHY and are united by functional integrity for a common purpose.
  The properties of a system are greater than the sum of the properties of the particles.
  The non-closure of the system is characterized by the presence of multiple sources and flows of materials, information, energy exchange between it and the environment.
  Non-linearity is one of the most important principles of the synergetic paradigm.
  Smooth changes in the standards of a nonlinear system lead to leaps and bounds in the state and properties of the whole system.
  Non-linearity testifies to the existence of many paths of evolution, the rapid development of processes and the irreversibility of changes.
  From a synergistic point of view, nonlinearity implies the existence of multiple alternative paths of evolution, an ever-changing rate of evolution, and irreversibility.
  At the same time, evolution can take place in both hierarchical and critical stages, quantitatively and qualitatively changing the criteria of the system.
  Instability is another indicator of non-linearity, which is manifested by unexpected changes in the direction of processes in the system.
  It is the totality of evolutionary changes, the form of movement and development.
 Synergetics states that complex self-organizing systems are not subject to external compelling factors of development.
  Rather, it is necessary to discover the direction of their own development tendencies and to promote those tendencies.
 According to synergy, there are several of them and all of them correspond to the internal nature.
 Synergetics has developed principles of management, which, applied correctly, in the case of a diseased organism can contribute to the mechanism of self-regulation and effective improvement of the organism.
  The disease is a disorder of the organism, as a result of the influence of this or that cause, a disorder, a type of chaos.
  The essence of the disease is clarified from the ecological point of view, that is, from the point of view of the normal interaction of the organism with the external environment 493 PHILOSOPHY.
  For example, the famous Russian pathologist AA Ostromov viewed disease as a disturbance of a person's normal life by the conditions of his existence in the environment.
  S.P. Botkin believed that the disease is the body's response to the harmful effects of the external environment.
  K. Bernard defines the disease as a violation of the physiological balance of orgasm [1, p. 324].
 Thus, the synergetic paradigm, based on the dialectical method, is not only a form of knowledge, but also a principle of understanding and treating man as a complex psychosomatic system.
  Synergetics and dialectics, as well as the systemic approach are closely related, synergetics uses the conceptual apparatus of these teachings, considering the principles of evolution, systematization, interaction, as well as the principles of chance, necessity and reality.
  The principles of dialectics in the synergetic paradigm expand their boundaries.
  Development is considered not only a consequence of the unity of internal and external influences, but also a tendency to purely internal self-organization.
 .
