The most frequently discussed issues in the field of judicial protection among practical lawyers are the violations of reasonable deadlines for years, which have various manifestations. Prolonged litigation with simple legal disputes, long breaks between court hearings, unnecessary postponement of court hearings due to objective or subjective reasons, incomplete and / or inefficient organization of court administrative work.
  The purpose of this article is to clarify what specific manifestations of violations of the right to a fair trial have been identified by the European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the European Court) and on what issue 107 JURISDICTION has invoked the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the Convention). as the criteria for assessing the issue of compliance with the reasonable deadlines for the examination of cases in the legal practice of the Republic of Armenia follows from such comments.
  The issue of applying the scope of this assessment criteria and, as a result, guaranteeing the right to a fair trial is at the heart of the issues discussed in this article.
 In this article, we will examine the reasonable timeframes of cases in the courts as an independent element of the right to a fair trial and an autonomous law, trying to emphasize the limits of application and the criteria for evaluation.
 The term "right to a fair trial" was reflected in both the 2015 Constitution (Article 63) and the 1995 Constitution. (Article 39) and 2005 (Article 19) in edited texts.
 The constitutional provision of the right to a fair trial (Article 63 of the current Constitution of the Republic of Armenia) is as follows: everyone has the right to have his or her case heard by an independent and impartial court within a fair, public and reasonable time.
 The constitutional guarantee of the trial within a reasonable time derives from Article 6 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the Convention) ratified by the Republic of Armenia on 26.04.2002, according to which everyone, when determining his civil rights and responsibilities or any other has the right to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent impartial tribunal established by law.
 The term "reasonable time" is one of the most widely used formulations in legal practice.
  The boundaries of this seemingly vague term have been clarified and clarified through the case law of the European Court.
 108 JURISDICTION The European Court considers the examination of a case within a reasonable time not only as a component of the right to a fair trial, but also as an autonomous right.
 In addition, the European Court has considered the right to have the case heard within a reasonable time in the context of the principle of effective examination of the case, emphasizing the possibility of damaging the effective examination of the case by violating the examination time [17, p. 58].
 It is noteworthy that the European Court's violation of Article 6 of the Convention was mostly registered on the basis of a "reasonable time" requirement, and the number of violations addressed to the European Court on this basis was 26% (total period 1959-2009). .) [1, pg. 157].
 In addition to the impact on the effectiveness of the case, the European Court has considered the right to an effective remedy in case of delays.
 Under Article 13 of the Convention, everyone whose rights and freedoms as set forth in this Convention are violated has the right to an effective remedy before a public authority, even if the violation was committed by an official.
 The European Court has held that domestic remedies in respect of Article 13 of the Convention are "effective" within the meaning of Article 13 of the Convention if they prevent an alleged violation or its continuation or provide adequate redress for any violation that has already occurred. had.
  Therefore, the remedy is effective if it can be used to expedite the decision of the court hearing the case or provide the applicant with adequate compensation for the delays that have occurred [24, p. 17].
 In order to assess a reasonable time, it is first necessary to refer to the beginning and end of the proceedings.
 109 JURISDICTION The European Court considers the beginning of the period for calculating the duration of the proceedings to be the moment when a claim is filed in a court of law, if the application submitted to the administrative body is not a precondition for initiating court proceedings, in which case the period may include mandatory preliminary administrative procedure. .
 Referring to the issue of expiration of the term, the European Court noted that according to Article 6, the duration of the proceedings also includes the appeal proceedings [22, p. 98].
 In one of the cases against Armenia, the European Court noted that the calculation of the time limit for determining the length of criminal proceedings begins on the date on which the person was "charged" in the sense of the term, for example, the date of arrest, the date on which the person was officially notified. that he is being persecuted or the date of the beginning of the preliminary investigation.
  This period ends on the day when the charge is finally confirmed or the proceedings are terminated [16, p. 126].
 The European Court of Human Rights has also referred to the enforcement of judgments in several cases and affirmed that enforcement proceedings should also be taken into account in the total length of proceedings, as it is an integral part of proceedings and will disappear only in the presence of a final decision. Violation of the applicant's right [28, p. 24].
 The European Court has been guided by several principles when discussing the length of the proceedings.
  In particular: 1. The reasonableness of the duration of the proceedings is subject to assessment according to specific criteria, which will be presented below.
 2. The reasonableness of the duration of the proceedings is subject to assessment in its entirety (first instance, appeals in the courts of appeal and cassation), not in each instance separately [22, p. 98].
 3. The reasonableness of the duration of the proceedings is subject to assessment according to the circumstances of the given case [22, p. 99].
 JURISDICTION 4. In some cases, delays may be due to specific circumstances (due to the applicant's conduct or court delays) that are not problematic in isolation, while the overall picture is essential for the assessment, which may result in a reasonable time violation [13, p. 90].
 5. In one of the decisions, the High Court upheld the fact of undue delays at a certain stage of the proceedings, which could have been avoided (referring to the performance of certain actions in the courts of appeal and cassation, making the decision, but provided that in their presence, even within a reasonable time) there is no problem, as they were not so significant as to conclude that the examination of the case was generally too long [27, p. 37].
 6. In a case where, according to the factual circumstances, the proceedings were interrupted, in particular, the case was transferred from one court to another, which lasted 9 months, then 4 months before the appellant filed the relevant motions, then 20 months. It took until the respondent presented its position and only 5 years later a court hearing took place. In view of all this, the European Court found that periods with such long breaks, which are not subject to any explanation, were inadmissible and the Court could not consider it reasonable. term [11, p. 33].
 The case law of the European Court has established the criteria for assessing the convention requirement of a trial within a reasonable time, which are: 1) the complexity of the case, 2) the conduct of the applicant, 3) the actions of the competent authorities, 4) what was at stake during the dispute for the applicant in the dispute) [15, p. 43].
 111 JURISDICTION 1) THE COMPLEXITY OF THE CASE When considering the length of the proceedings, the European Court considered it necessary to address the complexity of the case, for the assessment of which it considered several criteria in different cases, in particular: 1. the factual basis of the case and applicable law.
 In one of the cases, the number of property alienated on the basis of the disputed decision in court became the subject of consideration [26, p. 39], in another case the issue concerned the privatization of parks in the administrative territory of Rome, where the Court took into account both the sensitivity of the case to the public and the difficulties encountered under domestic law 2. The number of parties to the proceedings.
 In a case involving the transfer of custody of a child to a mother, the European Court considered the number of persons involved in the proceedings and the large amount of evidence thereby, as well as the complexity of their study and assessment [18, p. 72].
 3. The need to obtain evidence.
 In one of the cases, the European Court, considering the postponement of several hearings in order to obtain new evidence (evidence of the applicant's deteriorating health), found that the proceedings had been conducted within a reasonable time, finding that such postponements were in the interests of the case and were necessary for an effective investigation of the case [20, p. 63].
 4. Complex procedures conditioned by domestic legislation.
 In one of the cases before San Marino, the European Court has considered the strict procedure of examination of the proceedings according to the legislation of that country, according to which any case goes through 5 stages of examination, based on which there is a requirement to convene at least 8 court hearings.
  The Court notes that the State has an obligation to comply with Article 6 ีก 112 JURISDICTION of the Convention, and in this sense the time-limits in question do not meet the "reasonable time" requirement set out in Article 6 [31, p. 31].
 2) THE APPLICANT'S BEHAVIOR With regard to the applicant's conduct, the European Court stated that a person should only be required to show due diligence in the conduct of legal proceedings concerning him / her, to refrain from using delays and to use domestic law p. 35].
  In other words, from the point of view of the European Court, the actions within the point of view of the European Court are not presumed to be carried out within a reasonable time, but it is simply required that the person does not intentionally prolong the trial period and uses his rights in good faith.
 At the same time, the European Court has emphasized that the applicant's conduct is an objective fact which cannot be attributed to the respondent State, and in the context of Article 6 of the Convention it is always necessary to consider the applicant's conduct [34, p. 57].
 The European Court of Human Rights has ruled on the applicant's conduct in various cases, which may be called incompatible with the notion of 'reasonable time'.
  One such example is when the applicant changed his lawyer several times during the proceedings and logically every new representative needed to get acquainted with the case [22, p. 103].
 In one of its judgments, the High Court assessed the applicant's conduct as the respondent's delay in presenting its position to all domestic courts, which significantly affected the trial within a reasonable time. The Court found that the applicant 's conduct was "delaying" conduct. contributed to prolonging the proceedings [10, p. 61].
 JURISDICTION The Court also noted that only delays attributable to the State could lead to a conclusion within a reasonable time that the Convention had been violated [17, p. 55].
 (3) ACTIONS OF THE COMPETENT AUTHORITIES The Contracting States undertake to organize their legal systems in such a way that the courts can comply with the requirements of Article 6 of the Convention, including the obligation to examine the case within a reasonable time [29, p. As Member States have to organize their legal systems in such a way as to guarantee the right to a fair trial within a reasonable time, overburdening can not be considered as an excuse, although the temporary accumulation of cases does not involve liability for States, provided that the latter take legal action to resolve such exceptional situations [12, p. 51].
 If the frequent change of judges slows down the proceedings, as each judge must begin his or her work by reviewing the case file, this cannot relieve the state of its obligation to demand a reasonable time, as the state's task is to ensure that justice is properly administered [23, p. 58].
 (4) WHAT IS AT RISK FOR THE APPLICANT? should apply a non-general approach.
  For example, child custody cases [19, p. 72], labor disputes [30, p. 17], 114 JURISDICTION's main professional activity [22, p. 111], the right to education [25, p. 109].
 Thus, the legal practice of the European Court has refined and formed unique approaches and criteria for assessing the constitutional norm of a fair trial.
  In any case, when we consider the issue of ensuring the constitutional guarantee of the examination of the case within a reasonable time, we must discuss the situation considering the existence of both legislative tools and the possibility of exercising the rights available within the framework of the case.
  We consider it important to emphasize that the definition of a special procedure and terms of examination for several separate proceedings (labor, corporate, etc.) of the RA Civil Procedure Code adopted in 2018 is a step forward in the implementation of European court decisions in the national legal system.
  However, the problems in the RA courts related to the examination of cases within a reasonable time are still relevant.
  It is not a novelty that they are presented as a result of the overburdened work of the courts, but as mentioned in this article, this is not a sufficient justification for violating the convention requirement within a reasonable time, and the state must make every effort to make the judiciary work effectively. to organize.
 It should be noted that on 13.06.2006 The Council of Court Chairmen of the Republic of Armenia has adopted Resolution No. 98 "On Observance of a Reasonable Time Period of the Case" 1, which addresses a number of issues under discussion in this article, but it is important that this decision does not set a clear deadline in any way. Instructions of duration, but only defines the beginning of the term of examination of the case for criminal and civil cases and fixes that "1. The investigation of the case should be carried out as soon as possible. "
  The RA Constitutional Court on 05.02.2013 By decision No. 1074, he referred to "reasonable.
 However, we consider it important to emphasize that no new approach to the concept has been given and its application in the national legal system has not been interpreted, but the court has approved the same approaches developed by the European Court.
 Another legal tool, which was adopted in a new edition on 07.02.2018, is spectacular as a legal basis for ensuring a reasonable period of time. The Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia refers to the Constitutional Law of the Republic of Armenia, according to which Article 89, Part 1, Clause 28 of the Supreme Judicial Council: ... 28) sets guidelines for the average length of proceedings, according to certain types and complexity of cases.
  In other words, the legislator, as an element of the right to a fair trial guaranteed by the Convention and the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, has provided an opportunity to create a toolkit to guarantee the exercise of the right to hear a case within a reasonable time.
  At the time of the study of this article, that is, the Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia, one and a half years after the adoption of the Constitutional Law of the Republic of Armenia, there is still no common and unified approach to the duration of the examination of cases.
  As a result of studying this article, we conclude that based on the mentioned norm of the RA Constitutional Code, the Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia, it is necessary to develop a procedure according to which joint approaches will be defined for different types of cases, grouping them according to sectoral law institutes, such as property disputes. , family disputes, separating alimony claims and disputes related to child care and residence, insurance cases, etc.
  We suggest that the guidelines set for the examination of disputes be separated according to the courts.
  In any case, when developing such arrangements, the focus should always be on the status of the judge as an independent and impartial body that administers justice, which cannot be subject to unlawful restrictions (exercise of legislative powers) or any pressure, otherwise they will not be protected by a fair trial. legal guarantees that are elements of the same name.
  The implementation of the mentioned proposal will probably be a difficult and time-consuming work, but not impossible.
  At the same time, in the context of reviewing the proposal, we consider it necessary to mention that some sectoral institutions have time regulations.
  The problem is that, taken as a whole, they still do not ensure the implementation of the constitutional norm of examination within a reasonable time.
  In addition, it is important to note that we did not consider the existing legal regulations related to individual litigation (for example, decision-making deadlines, court hearings), but considered the duration of the case-type trial as a whole in one court instance.
 Thus, for example, if we consider the general deadlines for the examination of civil cases, they can state that there are clearly limited deadlines only in 2 cases of labor cases and in 3 cases of involuntary medical examination and / or treatment of the citizen, all other terms apply. to specific litigation, not to the process.
  That is, a number of cases, which presuppose urgency in their subject, are not examined in "reasonable terms" essential for their type.
  In the meantime, we consider it necessary to state that the trial in the Civil Court of Appeal, in comparison with the trial in the courts of first instance, takes place in a short and clear time4, which was promoted by the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia, Article 210, Part 2 (quarterly). Code of Civil Procedure Article 274, Part 1 (5-day or 24-hour period) Code of Civil Procedure of the Republic of Armenia Article 377 (three-month period for cases against a final judicial act, within 1 month for intermediate judicial acts) 117 JURISDICTION Code and especially the written case examination procedure in accordance with it.
  In other words, in the case of a general analysis, we can note that the proceedings in civil cases in the courts of first instance are held with long breaks and delays, and in the court of appeals in a shorter and more predictable time.
 Of course, in this respect it is also important that the RA Courts of Appeal and Cassation do not conduct the case at all, in fact, unlike the courts of first instance, but this in itself is not a basis for long-term hearings in the courts of first instance.
  Referring to the definition of the total duration of certain types of cases in administrative proceedings, we can confirm that the RA Code of Administrative Procedure has defined a wider scope than the RA Civil Procedure Code, perhaps giving preference to cases that are in the public interest5 and urgent need to eliminate the violation. 6 in the sense that in the event of a delay, the person may generally lose the right to exercise interest.
 However, for example, Part 2 of Article 219 of the RA Code of Administrative Procedure sets a two-month period from the moment of receiving the lawsuit for the proceedings of the cases on challenging the legality of the decisions of the authorized body related to the license.
  However, if such a judicial act is appealed, there is no legal norm limiting the duration of the proceedings.
  It turned out once again that such an incomplete regulation can not be a legislative issue within a sufficiently "reasonable time". For example, proceedings on disputing the legality of the mayor's decisions and actions on holding a meeting are based on Chapter 27 of the RA Administrative Procedure Code. 2) Proceedings on disputing the legality of the decisions of the authorized body related to the license, 3) Proceedings on disputing the conclusions of the Anti-Corruption Commission on the basis of the RA Administrative Procedure Code, chapters 28, 30 and 31.2, respectively for.
  As mentioned in this article, when considering the length of the proceedings, the European Court also considers the terms of the stage of compulsory execution of judicial acts, based on the final restoration of the violated rights of the person at the end of such a stage.
  However, in this regard, the RA legislation is more lame.
  Pursuant to Article 34 (1) of the RA Law on Compulsory Enforcement of Judicial Acts, a two-month period is set for enforcement actions, except in some cases, but in practice there are very few cases when the enforcement proceedings end within the specified period.
  This issue, perhaps, is the subject of a separate study and needs clear legislative regulations, as there is a violation of the mentioned legislative norm in every second enforcement proceedings.
  The study of the regulations of the domestic legislation allows concluding that the legal toolkit for the examination of the case "within a reasonable time" is strictly "local" and ineffective for regulating the overall duration of the proceedings.
  Meanwhile, the criteria for the examination of the case within the "reasonable time" formed by the precedent decisions of the European Court are sufficient to ensure the implementation of legislative changes and thus the application of the constitutional right to a fair trial.
 Thus, it is clear that the examination of a case within a "reasonable time" is an autonomous law, although at the same time it functions as a main component of a fair trial, the general operation and especially the possibility of direct action must be ensured by sectoral legislation and, if impossible, a common practice. The legal basis and possibilities for its creation were discussed in this article.
  As for the assessment of the "reasonableness" of the terms in specific cases, the precedent decisions of the European Court have formed sufficient criteria, which, considering each case 119 separately, create a general picture, from which the conclusion on the observance of the "reasonableness" condition follows.
 .
