The comprehensive and redefining of the concept of ombudsman through the disclosure of the content of the's judicial status is of both theoretical and practical importance, as it plays a predetermining role for the ombudsman's activities in the criminal proceedings arising in connection with the implementation of the defense.
 The theory of law states that legal status is the totality of all rights, freedoms and responsibilities of a citizen [1, p. 309].
  Among the types of legal status of the person are the branch legal status, which is defined by the norms of a specific branch of law (civil law, administrative law, etc.) and the special legal status [2, pp. 245, 3, p. 92].
 As G.G. Skerebets, the ombudsman, is endowed with special and sectoral legal statuses.
  The special status is determined by the Federal Law of the Russian Federation "On Advocacy and Advocacy", and the sectoral status is determined by the Criminal Procedure Code of the Russian Federation.
  It does not duplicate the ombudsman's sectoral status, but complements and specifies its special status.
 Thus, the exercise of defense by a lawyer (defender) enshrined in Article 5, Part 2, Clause 3 of the RA Law on Advocacy in criminal cases testifies to the latter's special legal status, which is specified in Article 68 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code 1 in the sectoral legal status reflected in the part and other criminal procedural regulations.
 Therefore, in order to determine the content of the Defender's procedural status 335 JURISDICTION, it is necessary to refer to the legal regulations defined by the RA Law on Advocacy and the RA Criminal Procedure Code.
 As for the definition of the ombudsman's judicial status in the legal literature, it should be noted that in theory the ombudsman's judicial status is defined on various grounds.
  These are: a) the rights provided by law, b) the rights and obligations, c) the rights, duties and responsibilities, d) the relations of the Defender with other participants in the criminal proceedings on the basis of the rights reserved to the Defender [5, p. 28].
 We agree with V.L. Kudryavtsev's approach that the ombudsman's relationship with the ombudsman on the basis of the rights reserved is based on the fact that liability is a form of legal obligation and the ombudsman's relationship with other participants in the criminal proceedings is regulated. by ethical norms and not by law, criminal procedure legislation.
  As a result, V.L. Kudryavtsev notes that the ombudsman's judicial status needs to be defined through the ombudsman's rights and responsibilities under criminal procedure law.
  In particular, the latter noted that the ombudsman's procedural status leads to the following definition of ombudsman: ombudsman is an independent participant in the trial, endowed with all means and methods not prohibited by criminal procedure law with certain rights and responsibilities provided by criminal procedure law to protect the rights and legitimate interests of the accused. , pp. 29, 39].
 336 JURISDICTION Based on the analysis of the RA Criminal Procedure Code and the RA Law on Advocacy, the jurisprudence states that the procedural status of a lawyer in criminal proceedings is conditioned by the following circumstances: 1. being a lawyer, who is confirmed by the Chamber of Advocates confirming his / her status as a lawyer. 2. the legal status of the person, ie when he / she represents the legal interests of the suspect or accused during the criminal proceedings and provides them with legal assistance, in other words, undertakes their protection; 3. with the consent of the suspect or accused, which is confirmed by the latter by a document ratified by the signature, and in case of mandatory participation of the Defender by the Code, without the mentioned consent, by the decision of the competent body [6,page 184].
 In order to fully and comprehensively define the procedural status of the Defender, to emphasize the procedural nature of the status of the Defender, we consider it necessary to consider the rights and responsibilities provided by the criminal legal status of the Defender and the legal protection necessary for the protection of the rights and legitimate interests of the defendant. under the prism of other defined circumstances.
 Accordingly, in our opinion, the content of the ombudsman's procedural status can be presented by dividing it into elements, moreover, in order to prove the ombudsman's acquisition of the judicial status of a criminal trial subject (participant in criminal proceedings), it is necessary to have all the elements defined by criminal procedure legislation.
  We are convinced that considering the ombudsman's case in such unity is due to the fact that the elements of the ombudsman's branch legal status, rights and responsibilities, cannot be realized without the presence of other elements and vice versa, ie the ombudsman's procedural status elements are mutually exclusive.
 In order to reveal the content of the Defender's judicial status, the elements defined by the criminal procedure legislation necessary for the protection of the rights of the defendant (suspect or accused) and the legal interests, it is necessary to refer to the RA Criminal Procedure Code, the new draft RA Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter the Draft) and the Law on Advocacy. »Complex and systematic analysis of legal regulations enshrined in RA law.
 Thus, Article 68 1 1 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, entitled "Defender", defines the notion of "lawyer", according to which a lawyer is a lawyer who represents the legal interests of the suspect or accused during the criminal proceedings and shows them Legal assistance by all means not prohibited by law.
  Paragraph 25 of Article 6 of the draft stipulates the following notion of a lawyer: a lawyer is a lawyer who undertakes and carries out the defense of an arrested person or accused during a criminal proceeding.
 According to Part 1 of Article 17 of the RA Law on Advocacy, a lawyer is a person who has the qualification of a bachelor of law or a lawyer with a diploma and has received a relevant license to practice law.
  When providing legal assistance, the lawyer participates as a representative or defense counsel in criminal proceedings and administrative proceedings.
 The following circumstances arise from the above-mentioned legal regulations: 338 JURISDICTION  The lawyer participates in the defense of the defendant during the criminal proceedings as a defense counsel and not as a representative; indicates the legal status of the suspect or accused (and in the case of a draft wording, the arrested person or accused);  legal assistance is provided to the suspect or accused, in other words, protection is provided by all means not prohibited by law.
 According to Part 2 of Article 68 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, a person acquires the status of a defense counsel with the consent of the suspect or accused from the moment of assuming his / her defense.
  This article conditioned the acquisition of the status of a lawyer with the consent of the suspect or accused.
 It should be noted that Article 70 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code stipulates the legal regulations on inviting, appointing, replacing a lawyer and other grounds for his / her participation in the proceedings, including the fact that the suspect or the accused agrees to acquire the status of a lawyer. Appointment by the Chamber of Advocates of the Republic of Armenia on the basis of a request in the following cases, through the mediation of the suspect or accused and in the case when the participation of a lawyer in the criminal case is mandatory and the suspect or accused does not have a lawyer.
 In accordance with the legal regulation on the confirmation of his / her status by the Defender stipulated by Article 71 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, in order to prove his / her status, the Defender submits an identity document to the body conducting the criminal proceedings and a document issued by the Chamber of Advocates confirming his / her status as a lawyer. to confirm the document certified by the signature of the suspect or accused or the decision of the competent body under this Code to appoint a lawyer.
 As a result of the above-mentioned theoretical approaches and legal analysis of the above-mentioned theoretical approaches and legal regulations on determining the ombudsman's procedural status, we have singled out the following elements that make up the ombudsman's litigation status: 1. Advocacy, 2. Procedural status of a person entitled to a lawyer; the function, that is, the protection in the form of its constituent elements: 4.1. The method of acquiring the judicial status of a defense counsel, that is, the assumption of defense, 4.2. the grounds for undertaking the defense or the participation of the defender, that is, inviting and appointing a defender, 4.3. the conditions for undertaking the defense, ie the consent of the suspect or accused, the requirement of the body conducting the proceedings to appoint a defense counsel, 4.4. borders of protection, that is, the means and methods of protection not prohibited by law, 4.5. the subject of protection, that is, the rights and legitimate interests of the defendant.
 It should be noted that the elements of defense serve as sub-elements for the judicial status of the defender.
 Summarizing the theoretical and legislative bases of the ombudsman's procedural status, we propose the following theoretical definition of the ombudsman's litigation status: the legal status of the ombudsman regulating whose simultaneous existence determines the acquisition of the status of a lawyer as a subject of criminal proceedings (participant in criminal proceedings).
 .
