Deep distrust towards the previous authorities of Armenia was registered back in 2001.
  The majority of respondents did not trust almost all the institutions of the Armenian political system, and instead of decreasing, distrust was growing.
 According to another representative poll, 74.6% of Armenians surveyed did not trust the legislature, 76% did not trust the judiciary, and 73.6% did not trust the government.
  A poll conducted by the Sociological Association of Armenia showed that only 1.8 percent of respondents agreed, and 18.8 percent agreed to some extent that decisions in the courts are fair and in accordance with the law.
  69.2% of the respondents answered that even when a dispute arises between people, they do not trust the solution of their problem to the court.
 45 The low assessment of the activities of the branches of government also led to a low assessment of the activities of the main political parties.
  According to the results of the polls conducted in 2003, 67.6% of the population did not trust the parties.
  About 16.2 percent trusted it in whole or in part.
  According to opinion polls, less than 5% of the country's adult population consider themselves ideologues of any party.
 The polls testified to the violation of the political mechanisms of representation of different groups of the Armenian society, the significant weakening of intra-party democracy.
  The deputies, who were ostensibly considered to be representatives of certain social groups, in fact were transformed into representatives of the party apparatus, bringing to life the phenomenon of the "representation of the representatives of the party apparatus".
 First, who will become a deputy of the National Assembly was mainly predetermined.
  Of course, the elections in Armenia were formally the expression of the will of the voters, but they had a special character, which after formulation took the form that we have already elected for you, and you, the Armenian voters, just have to confirm it.
  Second, during the previous government in Armenia, there was a vicious practice of so-called closed lists, which was widely used in parliamentary elections.
  Ordinary voters voted for the list of candidates nominated by the parties.
  The order of the surnames of the parliamentary candidates was determined by the party apparatus and was not subject to change.
  It was possible to vote only for the whole list, moreover, it was not possible to add new surnames in the list.
 As a result, the majority of parliamentary candidates remained unknown to the Armenian electorate.
  The candidates knew that they, in fact, did not represent any mass social group.
  Therefore, in fact, they did not have the political legitimacy necessary to oppose the social representation in the parliament and the party bureaucratic team.
  During the previous rule, Armenia became a clear example of "governed" democracy.
  The Armenian people de facto turned from a source of de jure power into an object of bureaucratic manipulations.
 The state of systemic alienation from the authorities or, in other words, the general crisis of trust, had turned into a deep distrust of many against the expediency of any national uprising.
  Moreover, the consciousness of many social strata of the Armenian society had grown into the conviction that, as if, they were unable to radically and for the better change both the situation in the country and the circumstances of their own life.
 During the Kocharyan-Sargsyan criminal regime, the typical states of dissatisfaction and protest inherent in ordinary Armenians were determined mainly by social emotions, their rapid rise and fall, and unjustified transitions from one extreme to another.
  Such was the "plasma" state of social emotions and political moods of protest, which was in constant fermentation, change and transformation.
  They testified to the decentralization of the political energy of the Armenian masses, the limitation of which was that the growth of the protest moods was not based on a strategy to get out of the crisis of confidence, on a clear understanding or conception understood by all Armenians.
 The mass Armenian, although dissatisfied, was deeply disappointed with the authorities, but had no plan of political action because he saw no alternative.
 The analysis of the current situation in Armenia has led us to the conclusion that we can no longer be satisfied with the "survival strategy" or the "methodology of partial accumulation of holes and holes".
  We need a nationwide program that will inspire people with hope for the future and orient them towards the future.
 Our studies have allowed us to substantiate and propose the national-democratic model of Armenia's modernization, which is completely oriented towards the values ​​of patriotism, democracy and justice, points out the crucial role of the nation-state in their establishment.
  The strategic turn towards the "bottom-up" modernization of Armenia has matured, which should be based on the following principles: 1. The socialization of development, which requires relying on the human and social capital of Armenia, to create favorable opportunities for the growth of diligence, social activity and entrepreneurship.
 2. National unification through national dialogue, which will ensure the harmonization of the interests of the Armenian state and society by different classes and groups, the correspondence of private interests to the primary interests of the country, the imperative requirements of its dynamic and organic development.
 3. Democracy demands to strictly follow the demands of the majority of the politically represented population in public life, to respect the interests of the minority, to take into account the interests of the latter.
 4. Realism requires relying on existing and as accessible material and social resources as possible, comprehensively taking into account the real institutional conditions for the development of the nation-state and society.
 5. Historicity and heritage require taking into account the historical, cultural and peculiar traditions, values ​​and peculiarities of Armenia and its people.
 6. Democracy: to deeply understand and respect the nature of the Armenian psyche, its norms and traditions, the values ​​of everyday morality, which guide the majority of the population of Armenia.
 7. The national responsibility of the state: the state must clearly realize its responsibility for the fate of our homeland, it must harmoniously unite the private interests of individual citizens in the system of national priorities of the country's development.
 The success of the implementation of the above-mentioned principles requires the construction of a new logic of national-democratic re-modernization of Armenia, based on the rational (rational) understanding of the real problems facing our country.
  The first step is an active national dialogue on our vital wrinkles and problems.
  During the dialogue, the main threats and challenges that determine the priorities and framework for the modernization of Armenia should be identified.
 The implementation of the model implies a wide program of measures. In the field of economy, to significantly increase the level of efficiency of state regulation of the economy, to ensure the development of the institution of private property and contractual relations, as well as free economic competition.
  A fully competitive market operates only when the right to property is protected by law and the relevant institutions that ensure its normal operation and development.
 In the legal-political sphere, first of all, to strengthen the system of restraints and counterbalances between the branches of state power, to increase the efficiency of their organic cooperation.
  Second, to ensure the rule of law in all spheres of public life, guided by the principle that the law is above any authority, any person, and that the interpretation of the law is given only by an independent court.
  In general, it is necessary to significantly change the law enforcement practice, to strengthen the democratic legal system.
  Third, to qualitatively expand the powers of the representative bodies of the government, to modernize the structure of the executive power of Armenia in order to ensure public control over the state decision-making process of civil institutions.
 48 Fourth, to create conditions for the expansion and development of inter-party competition.
  The parties must have a real opportunity to fight for the right to political power by proposing national programs and leaders to the Armenian society.
  It is necessary to improve the mechanisms of change of power, free elections.
  Finally, it is necessary to develop a new model of public administration, with democratic principles and mechanisms of efficiency, transparency, regular reporting to the Armenian society.
  It is about a system of public administration, which should be based on pro-patriotic cooperation between branches of government, business elites, parties, academic and branch science, non-governmental organizations.
 Healthy political competition, an effective system of restraints and counterbalances between the branches of state power, the rule of law, the change of government - all this forms the political logic of mitigating or gradually overcoming the systemic alienation of the Armenian society from the authorities, parties and NGOs.
  It is necessary to change the content and rhetoric of the government decisively.
  The need for it is dictated not so much by the demands of the national-popular project of modernization of Armenia, but by the new difficulties arising in the sphere of solving the vital problems of the country.
 We have no other way out. It is necessary to return to the management the problematic approach, which is connected with the conceptual understanding of the realistic ways of solving the problems and contradictions facing the country.
  When making government decisions, it is necessary to calculate in advance the clear balance of costs and benefits associated with them.
  Only in that case we will be able to avoid "Chernomyrdin's curse". "We wanted to be as good as possible, but it turned out as usual."
 If Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan manages to rebuild the relations between the Armenian state and civil society, to change the content of state governance, then all other issues will be much easier to solve.
 Today, Nikol Pashinyan's government is forming a new political agenda, which includes not only maintaining stability inside the country, but also carrying out reforms, first of all in the social sphere.
  It is no longer possible to silence social issues and postpone the relevant legal and political reforms, as it may lead to a crisis in the legitimacy of the governing system.
  The logic of social problems shows that maintaining political stability is no longer possible without solving social justice problems.
 The social-democratic concept or model of justice is more preferable for the post-Soviet Armenian society.
  This model raises a number of problems.
  First, the moral right of a person to manage his own life independently and without undue interference.
  He defends the principle of moral autonomy, which he considers incompatible with the comprehensive paternalistic functions of the state.
  Second, it provides legal guarantees of privacy and minimizes state interference in interpersonal relations.
  Theoretically, the issue of elaborating a scheme of fundamental rights is raised, and in practice, the positive functions of the state lead to the preservation and protection of those rights.
  Third, the social-democratic concept of justice interprets law in a special way.
  The law is developed based on the specific needs and interests of individuals.
  It is not so much about law in general, but about a branched legal system or, in the same way, about the totality of real rights and freedoms.
 In the West, the social-democratic concept of justice defends the idea of ​​a state that, while defending the core values ​​formulated by liberal ideology, at the same time avoids its extremes.
  According to that position, the modern state must be oriented towards such socio-political values ​​as freedom, justice, equality and solidarity.
  And, secondly, according to that concept, freedom is, to put it mildly, the right to be free from political coercion, to act according to one's personal goals and individual capabilities.
  Justice is the equality of rights and opportunities, the right to compensation for social inequality, the right to independence from capital and political power.
  Equality is the equality of people and the right to free development of the individual.
  Solidarity is the aspiration to unite with the national community, to join the compassion for the victims of injustice.
 Recognition of the special role of the state in socio-economic processes is combined with the protection of individual autonomy and individual rights.
  In other words, social-democratic and liberal approaches complement each other rather than contradict each other.
  The modern Armenian society is ready for the social-democratic understanding of justice and fair development.
  It is based, first of all, on the principle of 50 guaranteed security of socially vulnerable groups.
  This means that the socially vulnerable, poor in Armenia must be provided with real social guarantees of a dignified existence.
  They should be provided first of all to those who, really, due to objective circumstances, in case of making every effort, are still unable to solve their vital problems on their own.
  Second, it is necessary to identify and show state support to all capable forces who are ready and willing to work with dedication and perseverance, to use their knowledge and talent, but for that they need initial state support.
  Full use of national potential - this is the main formula of the national-democratic model of modernization of Armenia.
  Third, it is required that the domestic business team significantly increase its social responsibility before the Armenian statehood and people.
  This means that big business, first of all, must ensure the maximum allowable level of salaries of employees in conditions of competition, improve working conditions, implement social programs and so on.
  All this can contribute to the social integration of big business, the development of common rules for cooperation between the state, big business and civil society.
 Analyzing the priorities for the approval of the above-mentioned model, it is necessary to single out the problem of forming clear orientations of vertical mobility.
  There is no need to prove that without the creation of an effective system of "social elevators" it is impossible to ensure the demand for talent, initiative and diligence in Armenian society, the normal flow of the most active and professionally trained young people from the middle classes to high positions.
 A state of "traffic jams" of vertical mobility has arisen in the state management system.
  We connect its overcoming with the formation of social standards of vertical mobility.
  From this point of view, the experience of some Eastern European countries is instructive, where an attempt is made to establish the principles of meritocracy (the power of merit) in the public consciousness and in practice.
  Real earnings and investment are the main source of social status, material and moral compensation.
  According to merit, decent compensation, public demand for talent, initiative, diligence and conscientiousness should become the general criteria for overcoming social justice in Armenia and, at the same time, the alienation of professionals from the management system.
 51 The principle of meritocracy is inseparable from strict responsibility.
  It should be understood that if a state official obviously fails in his work while remaining unpunished, it not only violates any legal and moral values, hurts the sense of justice of an ordinary Armenian citizen, but also alienates him from the state and its institutions.
  The transition to meritocracy is connected with the creation of a modern system of compensation for human earnings.
 From that point of view, perhaps it would be right to restore the pensions of national significance.
  They must have a truly individual nature, and the order of definition must be regulated by state laws.
 Analyzing the priorities of the implementation of the principles of social justice and one of their manifestations - reducing the degree of income differentiation, we propose that the GDP per capita of the country, measured by purchasing power parity, in 2024 reach the level of 12 thousand dollars.
  In principle, it will allow not only to ensure a relatively high standard of living for the majority of the population of Armenia, but also to promote democratization processes.
 We should not forget that the extremely unfair distribution of the "national pie" is the main obstacle to improving the lives of the majority, as well as alleviating systemic alienation from the authorities.
 As never before, today in Armenia it is urgent to enshrine the principle of progressive income taxation in the legislation and law enforcement practice.
  At the same time, it should be organically combined with the development of new charitable mechanisms, which will allow the widespread use of contributions to socially significant funds in the practice of taxation.
  It is also necessary to consistently fight against social orthodoxy, setting a corresponding tax in case of receiving large inheritances.
  Such a practice exists even in the most liberal societies.
 One of the necessary preconditions for raising the socially unacceptable level of income is the recruitment of the middle class, its transformation into a numerous and authoritative political force.
  This requires progressive income growth for middle-class groups, which will give new impetus to vertical mobility and create a relatively fair system of social ambitions.
  High-quality education and professional training of the middle class will become important factors in the recovery and development of public life.
  In developing countries, this very class is the strong social pillar of the state, which not only determines the social atmosphere in the country, but also ensures the efficiency and effectiveness of state institutions.
 One of the other urgent steps of Nikol Pashinyan's government should be the significant improvement of the financial situation of the employees in the budget sphere.
  It will ensure progress in establishing social justice norms, creating effective mechanisms for vertical mobility, and improving the quality and status of higher education.
  In this way, it is possible not only to preserve and strengthen the legitimacy of the current authorities, but also to change the strategy for solving vital problems, first of all, the problem of mass poverty.
 One of the reasons for the inability of the authorities to solve the problem of poverty so far is that the emphasis in social policy is on the social protection of more vulnerable groups, the provision of various budget payments.
  We are convinced that it is also necessary to provide these classes with state support so that they have the opportunity to solve their own problems in practice.
  Various educational and professional qualification programs are very important in this case.
  They are especially necessary for socially vulnerable groups.
  For example, single mothers who care for sick children are in a worse position.
  Here you can not be limited only to benefits.
  Rather, it would be useful to have vocational training programs that are in demand and relatively well paid.
  It is expedient to provide the necessary devices and equipment to the insecure classes on lease or leasing.
  Creating independent working conditions is one of the active guarantees of such a more or less prosperous life, significant social status and, ultimately, the full upbringing of the growing generation.
  This opportunity is certainly more useful than the benefit.
  Therefore, the practical elimination of the causes of poverty is more effective and expedient than the artistic "decoration" of its consequences.
 One of the priorities for the implementation of the principles of social justice should be the national program for combating social inequality.
  The starting point for its development is the broad cooperation between the authorities and civil society in order to reveal the structure and scale of different types of inequality.
  This, in turn, will allow developing a system of national priorities for their elimination, clarifying the ways to support the vertical mobility of the population.
  An important part of this program should be the organization of monitoring of the socio-economic situation of the population of Armenia, including 53 expert monitoring of inequalities.
  Based on this, specific targeted programs for overcoming relevant inequalities will be developed.
 For the success of the implementation of the national-democratic model or project of modernization of Armenia, we need what we have lacked so much in recent decades - the feedback between the Armenian state and civil society.
  However, according to sociological research, 42.8% of respondents do not trust NGOs that are part of civil society in Armenia.
  [6] This age-old disease of mutual distrust, which has turned democracy into a mockery, can only be cured through the development of public institutions of participatory democracy.
  This is the only way to solve the problems facing Armenia and to avoid scholastic, life-threatening and fruitless debates.
  That is the mission of the Public Council, although it must be admitted that it did not meet the expectations of the Armenian society yesterday and today.
  The Public Council has not been established as an independent structure of civil society, but until recently it had turned into a faceless, consultative annex of the presidential apparatus.
  It was also not possible to involve NGOs in the discussions of problematic issues, as well as to transfer those discussions to a wide information field, which would make it difficult to hide the outrageous facts of life or the forms of alienation from power when everything is discussed and exposed in the press. They do not pay attention.
  Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan is personally interested in ensuring the involvement of the general public in the process of discussing important political decisions, knowing full well that democratic public institutions can be created without mass participation, but democracy can not exist without mass participation and support.
 In "New Armenia", wide public debates are vital, which have a practical orientation.
  This means that as a result, public initiatives must become an important component of state policy.
  Their implementation must be monitored by civil society.
 Today, as never before, laws are required to develop and adopt laws on the legal status of the Public Council and public oversight.
 Analyzing the mechanisms of government-civil society cooperation, it is concluded that these mechanisms should be regulated in such a way that they perceive and express the interests of large groups of the Armenian society at the right time and ensure their mutual coordination.
 Today, the practice of posting suggestions and even bills is widely used on the Internet.
  Every citizen can send his proposal or amendment of the bill to the Internet.
  For example, in Great Britain, the best of them are discussed in the parliament, and in some cases, they are taken into account in the final version of the bill.
  The mechanism of collective selection of the best solutions, the so-called "crowdsourcing" is widely used in Western countries.
  Here, in legal language, the "passive right" is realized - the citizen's opportunity to respond to this or that idea, the bill presented by the subjects of legislative initiative.
  "Passive law" can and should be supplemented with "Active law", ie citizens should be given the right to form the legislative agenda in the parliament, to propose their own projects and to formulate national priorities.
  It is interesting to note that if in Great Britain this or that proposal collects hundreds of thousands and more signatures, that proposal is discussed in the country's parliament.
  If this British practice is adopted in Armenia as well, it will cause a real "democratic revolution".
 We propose to discuss in the National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia the proposals of our citizens, which will collect fifty thousand and more signatures on the Internet.
  It follows that with this step, Internet democracy in Armenia will be united with the processes of direct development of the institutions of referendum democracy, growth of social and political activity of the citizens.
  In addition, we suggest that the drafts of the most important state decisions must pass in advance with the so-called "zero reading" filter, that is, be discussed in advance in the Public Council, in large non-governmental organizations.
 This age-old disease of mutual distrust and alienation of government-civil society can be cured only on the basis of transparency and openness of government institutions, unhindered and free competition of public forces, effective democratic procedures, mechanisms of strengthening government-civil society feedback, national dialogue.
 During the broad national dialogue, it is necessary to discover the common interests of the most active and nationally responsible groups with the development priorities of Armenia.
  However, the 55 common interests are not a necessary but sufficient condition.
  It is required to create a new alliance or, in the same way, a national coalition based on the ideological and political unification of these groups.
  The scenario according to which the famous national leader Nikol Pashinyan will act as the center and initiator of such unification is more favorable.
  If he manages to move the issue of organizing a national dialogue, to formulate new standards of national-government cooperation for the benefit of the civil society, it will become the Rubicon that will leave behind the manifestations of irreconcilable confrontation.
 .
