The issues of state and church separation and freedom of conscience were mostly influenced by the dissenting minds of medieval European philosophers.
 Simultaneously with the emergence of early capitalist relations, the Renaissance was born in Italy and spread to Europe.
  In the ideological forge of the latter, secular philosophical directions were instilled, such as critical realism, humanism17, which, liberating man from religious self-siege, proclaimed him as a high humanist. socially active being.
  As a result of their ideology, divine providence and the pursuit of the afterlife gradually gave way to earthly happiness.
 A separate branch of the humanist movement is the ecological (scientific) humanism, from which the secular humanist philosophy originates.
  Under the direct influence of the theory of evolution, secular humanism denied the idea of ​​God, the heavenly life, viewed man as the product of social evolution, not creation.
  One of the principles of the "Declaration of Secular Humanism" is the separation of church and state.
 187 JURISDICTION's core value, a key element of nature and the universe, highlighted a people-centered worldview based on a relaxed, proactive mind and intellect.
  During the formation of the concept of a secular state, secular science, art, secular perception of the universe appear.
  With the gradual weakening of religious dogmas and ideas, as well as canon law, a secular legal consciousness is formed.
 During this period, when legal and political thought was shrouded in religious spirit, and the Inquisition saw a ruthless judgment against any manifestation of heresy and dissent, politicians and theorists came forward to promote religious tolerance within the Catholic Church. , the issues of secession from the state and passing under its subordination.
 Thus the French philosopher, theologian John of Paris, in his work "De Potestate Regia et Papali" (1302), established the functional independence of the spiritual and secular authorities.
  The state is, according to the Parisian, a union of people united for the common good, where there is the one-sided power of a secular leader.
  After all, legal authority is always from God, but it is not exercised through the church, but through the people, because the people elect the monarch [4, p. 434].
 It should be noted that at the beginning of the 14th century in a number of Western European countries, and in particular in Italy, state and public life was accompanied by turbulent political and economic processes.
  The deepening of feudal relations hindered the opportunities for the development of trade and agriculture, and at the same time the strengthening of the bourgeoisie stimulated the revitalization of cities and trade and contributed to the weakening of the feudal dependence of the population.
  The thesis that harmonious coexistence and civic solidarity is possible only due to the existence of a strong secular state was widely spread.
  Gradually, the centralization of royal power became an issue on the agenda.
  It is in the logic of these events that the theoretical-ideological role of Dante Alighieri and Marcilius Paduaci is important.
 The 18 legal-political views of the Italian poet Dante Alighieri, a prominent representative of early humanism, were summarized in De Monarchia, predetermining new structures for the radical revision of state-church relations [6, pp. 327-346].
 Dante put forward the idea of ​​the autonomy of secular and spiritual authorities, criticizing the views of those who subjected the monarchy to the papacy.
  Citing a biblical thought, Dante writes: “God has created two huge luminaires, large and small, to illuminate one in the morning and the other at night.
  Moreover, they understand it as an allegorical word about spiritual and secular authorities. ”
  Dante refutes this notion of the clergy, who identified the monarch with the moon, stating that it received its light as a small illuminator from the sun, the pope [5, pp. 102-103].
  Dante not only argued that secular power could not be dependent on the spiritual, but also argued that the combination of the two functions contradicted their essence and was fraught with serious dangers.
  From this point of view, the pope and the monarch, as representatives of the divine will, do not oppose each other, but complement each other [4, pp. 127-138].
 Dante was actively involved in the political process in Italy and initially joined the political current of the Guelphs, who, as supporters of the papal power, were in sharp conflict with the monarch's supporters, the Ghibellines, predetermining the confrontation between the state and the church.
  However, disagreements with the Guelphs marked an ideological turning point in Dante's approach, in which case the monarch was already perceived by the monarch with his secular power as the far-reaching goal of the liberation of Florence and the unification of Italy.
 189 JURISDICTION Dante considered the best form of state to be a monarchy, where the absolute power of the monarch is based on law, morality, and divine commandments.
  Moreover, he saw the guarantee of world peace in the vision of the formation of a united worldly secular state headed by God's delegate monarch (emperor) [4, pp. 48-50].
 The principle of separation of secular and spiritual authorities is also expressed in an allegorical way in the famous poem "Divine Comedy" by the Italian thinker, where Dante writes: “Rome, which had improved the world, had two suns, which showed the way to earth and to heaven.
  One extinguished the other, and the sword and machetes mingled, and the result was that both sides became disordered, corrupt.
  ... Now by merging two departments, the church falls into the mud of Rome and defiles itself and its burden in pairs ”[1, pp. 89-90].
  In fact, Dante saw the cause of general immorality in the merging of secular and spiritual powers.
 In developing his conception of the secular state, he promotes the idea of ​​absolute freedom as a gift from God to Dante Alighieri.
  And that freedom is first of all the freedom to make a decision, that is to say, the freedom of will, of beliefs [4, pp. 41-42].
 The idea of ​​a secular state at the origins of its formation can be seen in the views of another Italian thinker, Marcilius Paduazzi.
  The culmination of his creative life is the work "Defender of Peace" ("Defensor pacis"), which emphasizes not only secular and religious, but also the issue of separation of legislative and executive powers, which became one of the theoretical and ideological pillars of the Reformation [2, p. 149].
 Padua strongly opposed the religious elite, outraged by the authority of the papacy.
  According to him, the doctrine of political supremacy of the Catholic Church "... is destructive to the human race and threatens to cause irreversible damage to any community or part of it if it is not stopped" [2, p. 67].
  The supreme authority should belong to the royal government, and the Catholic Church should be deprived of the functions typical of the secular government, as well as depoliticized and brought to the tax field.
  The church, being endowed with relative independence, was considered a component of the state mechanism.
  With this, however, Padua did not tend to exclude the role of secular power, limiting it by right.
  The monarch must follow the laws and not go beyond them.
 Paduan does not deny the thesis of the divine origin of power, but at the same time emphasizes that God establishes state government through free human reason [2, p. 101] without the intervention of the spiritual class.
  In this context, people can have a worldview in accordance with their beliefs, if only human law does not forbid it.
  This meant that the grounds for restricting freedom of religion were laid down by the state, not by the Inquisition of the Catholic Church.
 In this context, Padua developed his approach to distinguishing between human and divine law.
  Moreover, he believed that divine laws were established only by God and expressed in the Scriptures, and that all other rules and principles beyond that constituted human laws, created by man and governing earthly life on the basis of the demands of justice.
 Advocating for a single piece of legislation, Padua stressed that all people, both secular and spiritual, were obliged to abide by the mandatory norms of human rights [2, p. 288].
 Padua's nominalist, William Okkam, showed a similar attitude toward papal authority [3, p. 34].
  In his "Dialogue", "Eight Questions on Papal Authority", he sharply criticizes the Catholic Church, defending the supremacy and integrity of the monarchy 191 JURISDICTION.
  At the same time, Okam makes progressive judgments on the inherent issues of equality of all people, freedom of religion, protection of the common good by the state, law as the main regulator of public relations, harmony of natural and positive law.
 It is noteworthy that the above-mentioned thinkers, being tireless critics of the theological class and sowers of the idea of ​​a secular state, did not stand for the exclusion of God, alienation from public consciousness and godliness;
 Thus, the influence of the humanistic judgments of the Renaissance thinkers in the formation of the concept of the secular state becomes obvious, who changed the weight of man in the human-god relations and reinterpreted the theoretical provisions of natural law and especially fundamental human rights.
 .
