For the introduction of international experience in the formation of a national innovation system, as well as for the analysis of individual issues, it is expedient to select individual countries or unions, to make group classifications based on certain criteria, as well as to decide which countries' experience is correct. and based on the approaches, the model of the national innovation system of a specific country should be selected and localized.
 The innovation policy of the state is the basic element of the innovation system of any state.
  Therefore, by analyzing in detail the existing international experience in this field, in particular, the state innovation policy in the countries that have chosen different directions of innovation development, we can single out practical approaches applicable in the Armenian economy, which can ensure knowledge-based economic growth and global technology market. leading positions.
 One of the peculiarities of the management of Japan's national innovation system is the developed horizontal communication system, which ensures the involvement of state and private organizations in the formation of state economic policy.
  Research organizations (300 think tanks) also play an important role in the system of innovative activities, which monitor the development of innovative processes and forecasts [4].
  A relatively new and important direction in the innovation policy of the Japanese government is the formation and development of clusters.
  The cluster policy is based on the mechanisms of active support within the framework of venture business 82 ECONOMICS.
  Initiatives to develop and expand cooperation with foreign organizations, universities and research institutes are also encouraged.
 The peculiarity of China's national innovation system is that historically the state has played an important role in its development.
  The state defines the priority spheres of industrial development, innovation development programs, which are guided by universities and research institutes in the future.
  The Chinese government is using all possible tools to promote innovation by supporting the transfer of technology and the commercialization of intellectual property.
  One of these mechanisms is the creation of special zones and incubators that support high-tech fields.
  The motto of China's Medium-Term and Long-Term National Science and Technology Development Program is to strengthen the development of independent (local) innovation.
 In the United States, the state is creating infrastructure in the private sector as part of research, which promotes the development and mutual penetration of technology.
  The analysis and forecasting of technology development is carried out by the state in order to orient the private companies, to identify the most promising directions of technological development with their direct participation, to separate the most important technologies and to prioritize the future.
  Assessing the country's development prospects and competitiveness with other countries contributes to the substantiation of foreign trade policy and the solution of subsidizing problems in certain sectors and companies.
  The state demand is formed and the purchasing power of the state is predetermined, thus influencing the innovation market, first of all in the sphere of high technologies.
 ECONOMICS The State has also assumed all obligations related to the establishment of partnerships between the main economic agents involved in the innovation process, such as cooperation and partnership between institutions and industry, between federal contract centers and institutions.
  These commitments may take the form of participating in work by federal laboratories or building partnerships between participants.
 To build a national innovation system in the United States, the government encourages the creation of venture capital foundations and research centers.
  According to the US National Science Foundation [5], the most effective research centers and venture funds can be fully or partially funded from the state or federal budget for the first 5 years of their operation.
  One of the direct elements of supporting innovation processes is the formation of innovation infrastructures by the state.
  The state can set up networks of innovation centers and consulting centers that will provide business services to innovators.
  Government agencies monitor and forecast the development of innovative processes in the country and abroad, and try to find the most effective and advanced technologies for further implementation.
  The state expertise of innovative projects also occupies a special place, as it is difficult for individual organizations engaged in innovation to assess all their possible consequences on the economy.
 Germany is one of the leading countries in the world in terms of innovation.
  Expenditures on research and development in Germany in 2010-2014 They accounted for 3% of the latter's GDP, while in the EU only Finland and Sweden have 84 ECONOMICS funding for science, which exceeds the mentioned level of GDP.
  Five of the ten "most knowledge-based" companies in the EU are German.
  In terms of the number of scientific publications, the FRG ranks 4th in the world with a share of 7.2% (after the United States, China and the United Kingdom).
 Germany's innovation policy is implemented at the federal level and is based on the following principles: [2] 1. Continuous increase in the volume of state funding for research developments, with an emphasis on the more developing fields and technologies of science.
 2. Development of the "Innovation Elevator" mechanism, as well as the creation of the necessary institutional conditions for the introduction and commercialization of innovations.
  Germany's innovation policy is focused on the integration of science and the business environment.
 3. Professional development and professional training of employees, engineers, designers with technical specialties.
  Every year, the German economy receives an influx of up to 100,000 new engineers and scientists with higher education at technical universities or colleges.
 Small and medium-sized businesses play a key role in the development of Germany's national innovation system.
  The share of small innovative business is 54%.
  Thus, it can be argued that every second German company is engaged in innovation activities.
  Although a number of small and large business companies in Germany are financially independent, there are more than 200 entrepreneurship support programs at both regional and federal levels.
 The latter are financed through the state-owned Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau or its subsidiary Deutsche Investments- and Entwicklungsgesellschaft (DEG-Investment and Development Corporation).
  In addition, preferential lending to small and medium enterprises is envisaged in the country.
  There are 12 companies in Germany, which are operators of innovation programs in the field of 85 ECONOMICS, such as research and financial institutions, business and professional associations, and structural branches of the German Federal Ministry of Economy and Technology.
 The state mechanism for managing innovation processes in Germany is a powerful lever to strengthen its position in the global scientific-educational space.
 Competitive financial support for higher education institutions allows universities to conduct advanced scientific research, successfully commercialize the results of intellectual activity, as well as strengthen the staff potential; These effective mechanisms allow us to create a unique image of a competitive German higher education system capable of responding to the most pressing challenges of modern science and technology and of public life.
 The active state policy of promoting the international transfer of technology, including indirect and direct subsidies for basic research, according to some experts [1], also underlies the economic miracle of South Korea and Taiwan.
  The elaborate system of industrial policy priorities has allowed the government not only to stimulate innovation in certain sectors of the economy, but also to ensure their mutual penetration.
  In addition, the policy envisaged measures aimed at improving the education system, training highly qualified specialists and the general development of the industry.
  The object of promotion was not only the use of absolutely new technologies, but also the imitation of existing technologies in developed countries, that is, the mastering of the production of "import substitute" products.
  1980s Korea embarked on a policy of creative imitation.
 Referring to the Russian Federation, we can state that the main elements of the national innovation system are 86 ECONOMICS, and for their successful operation it is only necessary to amend, that is, to form reliable channels between these elements [6].
  In the medium term, a more active innovation development strategy of the Russian Federation has been formed, which, if successfully implemented, will allow us to use the advantages of the Russian innovation system and correct the shortcomings.
  A partial manifestation of this policy is the Skolkovo Scientific-Educational Center.
 These contributions also underlie the modernization and technological advancement of the economies of Israel, Chile, Estonia, and a number of other countries.
 Thus, the study of the experience of countries with developed innovation economies and such prospects proves that the state should be one of the most active agents in ensuring the innovative development of any country.
 In conclusion, we can state that որեւէ No economic, market form of organizing the production of innovations allows to reach a socially effective level, if the state does not have direct or indirect participation in that production.
 ։ Incentives for innovation companies are sometimes weak, and the company or inventor makes an innovation effort only if there are better conditions for innovation in the country than for the production of other products.
  The main accelerator of progress is the effective policy pursued by the state; As evidenced by our study of international experience in the formation of a national innovation system within the framework of the above questions, the state should take the following measures to define the "rules of the game" in the field of innovation and the formation of the necessary tools.  Given the country's priorities, global economic development trends and the global market 87 ECONOMICS due to the need to ensure the country's competitive position, outline relevant targeted research and development of public procurement system; սահմանումը Establish criteria for independent expertise for scientific projects, institutes and organizations;
  The combination of the latter allows you to mitigate the shortcomings of each system and make the most of the advantages.
 Համապատասխան Conformity of the educational system V. Gumboldt concept [1].
 Մոտեց Approximation of R&D costs to world standards.
  The latter account for an average of 2.13% in the world economy [10], 2.03% in the EU and 2.04% in the OECD countries [9].
 Աճ Increased spending on education.
  The world economy spends an average of 4.7% of GDP on education, [10] including 4.4% of GDP in the EU, $ 4.4% in Russia and 4.8% in Estonia.
 Thus, as we have mentioned many times, the innovation sphere, more than any other sphere, depends on the efficiency of the public administration system.
  The success of the country is due to the rationally structured system of research organizations, significant investments in science and education, as well as close cooperation between government agencies, business associations and scientific institutions.
  Such an effective mechanism of the national innovation system provides the country with a high percentage of commercialization of innovative innovative products and allows it to be among the most developed countries in terms of innovation.
 .
