The key consumer of higher professional education in universities is the university graduate, who strives for education in order to achieve prosperous positions in society.
 Therefore, reforms in the field of vocational education must first of all satisfy the interests of consumers of educational services, which is currently finding its place in the ranking system of universities.
 Quality rating by education management professionals is justified by the fact that a bachelor's or master's degree graduate, still a university applicant, must be convinced that the profession will be in demand in the job market.
  Currently, different rating scales are presented in the international market, indicating the competitive position of the university in them (see Table 1).
 Studies show that, in addition to economic crises, the lack of skills and competencies of a specialist during his / her studies may be one of the main reasons for the unemployment of university graduates in the European Higher Education Area (BSEC).
  In this regard, universities strive to direct the learning outcomes as much as possible to the skills and abilities of a specialist required at the first or second level of vocational education.
 See The European Higher Education Area in 2015.
  Implementation Report, p. 171-173 3 PEDAGOGY Table 1 Top Ten Universities by Internationally Recognized Ranking Scale (2017) 2 Position Leading Universities University of Oxford University of California University of Technology Stanford University University of Cambridge University of Massachusetts University of Technology Harvard University of Technology Students's 10.9 share of international students And the problem is not only that the graduate specialist may not have a sufficient range of sufficient skills or abilities, and thus, not be required by the employer.
  In practice, there are many cases when the employer is not satisfied with the wide range of professional skills acquired during education, as it is "oversaturated" and is not applicable at work.
  And it turns out that in that case, bachelor's or master's degree graduates are considered "highly qualified" by employers and as a result do not go to work.
  Studies show that among employers of unemployed university graduates in Western Europe for the employer 4 PARTICIPATION The share of young professionals with "overqualification" ranges from 14-35% 3.
 The situation in question is becoming more acute in the Republic of Armenia, as according to official statistics, in recent years the largest number of unemployed are people with higher education (see Table 2), who have a high level of educational qualifications and surpass employers in the quality of their professional skills and abilities. The level of requirements, and being assessed as "highly qualified" by the latter, they simply do not receive a job offer.
 Table 2 Unemployed in Armenia by educational censorship (thousand people) 4 Education censorship Total Higher, postgraduate Secondary vocational Secondary Basic General Elementary Total 242.1 Male Female In this regard, there is an opinion that despite some achievements of the Bologna process in Armenia, The implemented reforms are mainly related to the structural characteristics of higher education and, in general, have not yet affected the content and quality of educational programs5.
 NSS Yearbook, 2015, page 72 Gabrielyan M., Bologna Process. Student-centered system? // Open Society Foundation - Armenia 5 PEDAGOGY These, in turn, lead to the fact that the education system, in general, still remains "disconnected" from the workplace and does not fully take into account the demands of employers.
  Vocational education programs are often oversaturated with subjects that are not directly related to the skills and abilities required of graduates, or do not include up-to-date subjects that would develop today's graduate competencies addressed to employer requirements.
 The importance of the human factor in the organization of the educational process is obvious.
  There are many examples when there is enough information, opportunities, but students and teachers do not use or do not want to use them6.
  Therefore, universities should make an urgent transition to the organization of education based on the learning outcomes, clearly stating in the professional curriculum to what extent and how the subject relates to the formation of the graduate's professional abilities and skills.
 In this way, it will be possible to unload the curriculum from the "indirect" subjects that overload the curriculum, instead including new subjects with the final results that meet the demand of the labor market in the learning process.
  Targeting learning outcomes to the demands of the labor market will greatly increase the effectiveness of reforms in the vocational education system.
 Therefore, today the educational programs are considered competitive, as a result of which not only "knowledgeable" but also "creative skills" graduates are formed.
  In this regard, in professional educational programs, much attention should be paid to the results of the student's formal rather than formal individual work, aiming to develop the student's creativity, innovator Gabrielyan M., Bologna process. Student-centered system? // Open Society Foundation-Armenia.
 6 PEDAGOGY and self-expression, which is one of the requirements of the current Bologna process7.
 In order to assess the competitiveness of the provision of vocational education services, it has become a tradition to publish the ranking scales of universities, which has been used in international practice for several decades by various rating agencies.
  The practice of ranking universities in the Republic of Armenia has only found its application since 2013.
  Thus, in 2015, Yerevan State University was in the first place, the Armenian-Russian Slavonic University was in the second place, Yerevan State Medical University was in the third place, the American University was in the fourth place, and the National Polytechnic University of Armenia was in the fifth place. University, 6th - French University in Armenia, 7th - Armenian National University of Architecture and Construction, 8th - Kh. Abovyan Armenian State Pedagogical University, the 9th - V. Brusov State University of Linguistics and Social Sciences, the 10th is the Armenian State University of Economics8.
 However, the ranking of universities is not unequivocally accepted by the beneficiaries of the education sphere, both in our republic and abroad.
  On this occasion, the European Students' Union adopted a declaration, highlighting the shortcomings of the rating.
  First of all, the students think that the Bologna process should focus more on the quality assurance accountability of the universities, and not on the rating.
  If quality information becomes a guide for students, the ranking exacerbates the polarization between West and East and underscores the inequality of education in BKET.
 In addition, students oppose the marketization of universities by viewing the ranking at the Conference of Ministers of Higher Education, Yerevan Communication 2015 Source: www // ranking.armedu.am 7 PEDAGOGY's marketing factor 9.
  They consider that the ratings are a threat from the point of view of social orientation and can not play a solid guiding role in the choice of the university, as the ranking in the educational market targets the university's reputation and does not comprehensively reflect the interests of the student and the applicant.
 .
