Legal-political discourse usually contains untrue structures.
  The most significant of them are: lie, mistake, manipulation, myth, narrative, simulation, etc.
 These elements of legal-political discourse are in relation to each other 497 PHILOSOPHY in various relations and cause some elements of discourse to remain unnoticed, meaningless and unnamed.
  It is clear that the name and the meaning necessarily imply each other, giving an opportunity to master and regulate situations and phenomena. "We need words to rule the world, because we need words to rule emptiness [11, 118 pages]."
 In the legal-political discourse, among the above-mentioned (and not listed) structures, there is a kind of untruth, which, being recognized as untrue, is accepted and legitimized.
  This legitimized untruth not only "replaces" the possible truth with its existence, but also overshadows the need and search for the true truth.
  Over time, this becomes a belief, and critical approaches to it are automatically taboo, ignoring the fact that it is not true.
 It is not ruled out that the existence of a legitimized untruth will contribute to the progress of the legal-political discourse and open new horizons with its presence, including in the negotiation discourse.
  However, it can also damage the settlement of conflicts, pushing the negotiations to a deadlock.
  The fact that the legitimized untruth is not understood and analyzed has a negative effect on the speech process.
 And vice versa, if it is analyzed and made meaningful, it will become noticeable and manageable, and if necessary, it will be removed.
  Therefore, the purpose of this analysis is to show the causes and mechanisms of the origin and operation of legitimized false structures.
  But first, about the more or less known and analyzed untruths.
 The error, being an expression of error or ignorance, is in itself unintentional, and the lie, in contrast to the error, pursues the insidious tendency to take the place of the truth, hiding its untruth. Those who tell a lie "... say one thing, but know another in themselves [5, 38 pages]".
  Both the 498 PHILOSOPHY error and the lie express a non-existent situation, but the liar, unlike the erring one, knows that it is so and that is why he says it.
  So, the essential feature of a lie is that it is told with a deceitful motive.
 Manipulation is also an expression of error (often connected to the truth), which is "... a way to control people's behavior through the programming of spiritual influence [7, p. 32] ».
  It is as treacherous and intentional as Sast, but it is "richer" because it is not only imaginative, but also action and practice.
 The narratives that substantiate probably all human actions have no basis; they are always primitive and predestined.
  They not only provide relevant rules of conduct, but also explain, substantiate and legitimize all criteria, including the legitimate forms, means and content of their very existence and expression.
 The narrative, being beyond true / false measurement, automatically functions as a unique kind of non-truth [see pages 8, 51-61].
 Political myth can be defined as a dramatized narrative of purposefully selected cases in which target groups are directed toward a certain political identity [see pages 146-139].
 Myth (political as well) being a kind of narrative, is also out of truth / error, because "... in myth there is its mythical truth, its very mythical standards and certainties, mythical regularities ... [9, p. 55] ».
  It is noteworthy that the myth differs significantly not only from lies, mistakes and manipulations, but also from utopias, although it may contain a number of elements specific to utopia.
 Utopias can be viewed as intellectual products that theorists suggest as reform programs.
  These are concepts of public organization, the truth / falsehood of which can be completely refuted or confirmed, taking into account the existing facts (economic, political and other nature).
  In contrast 499 PHILOSOPHY these political myths are not descriptions of a possible society in the future, but actualizations of dramatic (tragic) events [see pages 14, 15].
 Simulyakr is the birth of postmodernity, within the framework of which reality has become a model, and the opposition between the sign and reality has disappeared.
  According to the postmodern philosopher J. Baudrillard, simulacra are everywhere, and everything in itself is simulacrum.
  Nowadays, reality has become hyper-real, and simulacra are no longer images of existing objects, but of objects that do not exist, that is, simulacra are signs that have no designators.
  Reality is killed, and the new and the supernatural survive through the strategy of public horror.
 The French philosopher thinks that in this situation the whole legal-political sphere is in the same simulative status.
  Real power no longer exists, and it has been a long time since any leader of any power has turned into his own simulator, and this is the only reason why some kind of government is still possible.
  He claims that all public institutions are dead, and their simulators are forced to organize a simulation of their own death in order to escape from the vicious circle of their irresponsible and non-existent existence.
  They pretend to be dead a long time ago.
  Therefore, this is the reason for the fact that "... in the past they tended to hide the scandal, but today they try to cover up the absence of the scandal [6, p. 35] ».
 Judging by the peculiarities of all the constructs described above, we can say that they are all different from each other and legitimized from untrue.
  These elements of legal-political discourse differ from each other not only in their essence, but also in their causes, conditions and processes.
 Thus, political agents, having no alternative, find themselves in a hopeless situation and are forced to accept and legitimize the institutions that have put up another PHILOSOPHY with another employer (conflicting and / or mediating party), clearly realizing that they are not true.
  At the moment, the politician prefers to accept and legitimize the untrue ideology as the least evil.
 That is, that preference, apparently, is beneficial.
  It is also possible that such a benefit does not come from circumventing the greatest damage, but simply from being profitable.
 Finally, it is possible that the false view put forward to the legal-political client, having no alternative, is comparable to the group and / or individual interests of the given client.
 That is, the reason for this type of untruth to appear and operate in legal-political discourse is, on the one hand, the interest and, on the other hand, the inevitability.
 Here it is very important to clarify and clarify the above definition and explanation of the legitimized untrue view.
  The untrue ideology, which is accepted and legitimized in the place and instead of the true ideology, acquires its uniqueness by the fact that it is aware of all the conflicting (negotiating) parties.
 This situation raises a legal question. What guarantee is there that all the negotiating parties, who have nominated, accepted and legitimized this untrue idea, are aware of its true essence (untrue)?
  This question is completely grounded, because the legitimized untrue is considered to be the type of untrue structure, the essence of which is known first of all to the customer to whom it is nominated.
  It is clear that this employer can be not only one individual, but also some group of individuals - commission, organization, state, etc.
  For this reason, any point of view that is not true can be considered legitimate if it has been accepted by the given structure, at least one of the members of which has actually stated that the structure is not true.
  That is, the fact that the untruth is not true must be clearly clear to those who accept it, so that the latter is considered a legitimized untruthful structure.
  This essential circumstance poses a serious complication in the identification of the legitimized untruth.
  The difficulty is that the agent to whom 501 PHILOSOPHY pursues such an ideology seldom expresses in direct text that he is aware that the ideology proposed to him is not true.
  He, like the nominee, hides the fact that the given structure is not known by him.
  In other words, fully understanding that the structure proposed to him does not correspond to the reality, this employer not only allows, but also promotes that he is "deceived".
  Therefore, the verbal element, the existence of which, it is simply impossible not to be known to those who accept it, can also be considered legitimized and untrue.
 The fact that the employer who accepts the untrue provision (against his will) does not express the fact of his knowledge in a direct text, does not mean that the given employer does not know it.
  Moreover, he may even deny that the given statement is not true, but that denial also does not mean that he expresses the reality.
  On the contrary, it is very logical that the employer, who accepts the untrue point of view, publicly denies its untruth or does not deliberately address the issue.
 It turns out to be a very unique, almost paradoxical, cognitive situation and a question that arises in connection with this, the answer to which is not easy to give. If both the deceiver and the "deceived" are aware that a process of deception is taking place, then who is the real victim of this deception?
  One of the possible candidates to be a victim is the general public watching the legal-political processes, the misleading of which can pursue a preventive goal.
  That is, since a legal-political transaction takes place, the cancellation of which is beyond the power of the employer to whom it is imposed, and the general public can only create additional complications for the obliging party, so a false structure is circulated in order not to arouse public dissatisfaction.
  And the compelled party agrees or is silent, because it realizes that even if the dissatisfaction of the general public appears, it is the same, in case of voicing such an untruth and not accepting it, the penalty will be greater than it can be of silence and acceptance. In this case.
  502 PHILOSOPHY OF FRAUD The other possible victim is the society, the interests of which are represented by the legal-political factor to which the given false structure has been imposed.
  The coercive and coercive parties tacitly agree not to voice the fact that the proposed structure is not true, so that when the essence of the unjust legal-political deal is revealed later, the coercive party can avoid the accusation of treacherous intent, pretending that he was simply deceived.
  And the compelling party, in its turn, avoids accusations of being tyrannical or eloquent.
  Finally, the victim of this deception may be the very businessman who is forced to accept the untrue ideology, who is forced to accept the rules of the game dictated to him, hoping that he can achieve his goal, even within the framework of those imposed rules.
 All this is just one of the many possible scenarios of the process of legitimizing untrue origin and circulation, each of which, in the face of other existing situations, can have many breakthroughs.
  And the general reasons for accepting the legitimized untrue in all this are: Existence of an impossible situation and / or overlap of interests.
 It is noteworthy that if the reasons for the appearance and operation of the legitimized untrue are almost completely clear, then the conditions and the occasion for the appearance of these very consequences are very uncertain.
  Uncertainty is that one can describe and cite from history a combination of the existence of conditions that are the basis for the emergence and operation of the legitimized untruth.
  However, it is impossible to claim that in other conditions the legitimized untruth would not be introduced into a legal-political discourse.
  Thus, for example, when justice occupies an insignificant, secondary place in a society, the members of that society have a dichotomy (or multiplicity) of legal consciousness.
  At the same time, they have a civic consciousness, fulfill their civic duties and rights, but also use the services provided illegally by the 503 PHILOSOPHY cultures (countercultures) operating in the given society, use their vocabulary, cooperate with them.
 In the conditions of this dichotomy of legal-political consciousness and practice, the appearance of the legal-political agent in a situation of hopelessness and / or expectation of profit becomes an occasion for the latter to accept the untrue structure proposed to him.
 It can be argued that in the presence of these conditions and reasons, the legitimized untruth arises and operates, but to be sure that in other conditions the existence of the same reason would not be an occasion for the legitimized untruth to be introduced into legal-political discourse is baseless.
 The reason for this uncertainty is probably that any speech is almost always multi-layered.
  Any formal-formal speech (in its subtextual depth) is always accompanied by informal, subcultural speeches, which, penetrating each other's domains, are contained implicitly in each other.
  It can be argued that the low level of public justice causes disappointments in formal relations, due to which the legal-political consciousness of a person is divided and, if there is a reason, it gives birth to a legitimized untruth.
  However, history and modern legal-political discourse prove that the legitimized untrue can be introduced into legal-political discourse without the existence of the conditions described above as well.
 Thus, it can be said that all the obligatory conditions for the appearance of a legitimized untruth are unknown, in contrast, all the reasons are known and clear.
  The uncertainty of the conditions does not allow (or greatly hinders) to predict and / or prevent the introduction of legitimized untruth into legal-political discourse.
  In contrast, the circumstance of definiteness of reasons allows to retrospectively discover, determine and, if necessary, to exclude the legitimized untruth from the framework of legal-political discourse.
 504 PHILOSOPHY It is noteworthy that the process of legitimizing the untrue takes place on the basis of the so-called estopel principle used in legal proceedings.
  And since the transition from the legal-political discourse estopel to the actual legal estopel is only one step and can take place with the help of political and economic means, so here it is necessary to refer to the essence of the "estopel".
 The legal literature proves that this principle is recognized in one way or another in all systems of private law and is now also introduced in the field of international law as a general principle.
  The meaning and function of Estopel is to impose indiscriminate consistency on the subject of law (from the legal-political agent).
  In other words, the legal-political factor cannot add a point of view within the framework of the same legal process, which contradicts the position expressed by it before (by a tacit declaration).
 The operation of both the tacit and the expressed versions of the Estopel principle has existed in the jurisprudence since ancient times.
  For example, the Mosaic Law states: "And if his covenant be made in his house, or the border which he shall swear by, he shall separate himself from it, and his husband shall hear it, and shall keep it; and he shall keep all his covenants; .
  10-11) ».
 Estopel has already been circulated by a number of reputable courts, including the International Court of Justice (ICJ), so the significance of this principle is beyond doubt.
 The essence of Estopel, as noticed by A. Ovchar is defined in the semantic translation of the Latin proverb, according to which "No one can benefit from his own inconsistency."
 This coercion of consistency applies not only to the position expressed (by declaration or otherwise), but also to the silence, the existence of which presupposes agreement 505 PHILOSOPHY (again position).
  If the legal entity is silent on an issue, when it could (or perhaps needed to) disagree, but does not, it means that it agrees with the current situation.
  In this case, the legal-political agent actually (by default) waives his right to appeal, thus clarifying the limits and nature of his claims.
  This meaningful silence becomes a "biographical" part of the employer's lawsuit and necessarily affects the "fate" of the dispute.
 The practice of international legal relations proves that the observance of silence (the position expressed by it) for the emergence of estopel can be both partially probative and decisive, but the complete absence of influence is ruled out in principle.
  Sometimes "... silence and lack of appeal are so fundamental that they themselves determine the resolution of the dispute [12, p. 10] ».
 Of course, keeping silent does not always have to have a direct effect on the resolution of the dispute.
  It can also have an indirect effect through mediation.
  In other words, it is possible that the essence and sequence of his further steps will be conditioned by the previously expressed position of the legal-political factor, and all this will have a chain effect on the resolution of the legal case.
 According to the Estopel principle, the legal agent (for example, the plaintiff) is deprived of the right to rely on certain facts or to object later, if he has renounced his subjective right in the given legal case.
  This principle has found its intensification in a number of legal decisions, laws, etc.
  For example, according to Article 47 1 1 of the Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia, the appellate court has no right to accept new evidence and when examining the appeal is based only on the evidence presented to the court of first instance.
  It is a completely different matter that the Court of Appeal will dismiss the case and send it to the relevant court of first instance for a new examination if the evidence was not presented during the examination of the case in the court of first instance against the will of the parties [see pages 4, 27].
 All this shows that the esophagus resulting from silence is as important an act in legal-political relations as the acts of recognition and concession, because in practice these three give exactly the same result, although they differ from each other in process and theory [see, 13, page 515].
 The legitimacy of the untrue structure in legal-political discourse is similar (or almost identical) to the process of Estopel's formation.
  One of the conflicting parties (including the mediators) expresses an untrue provision within the framework of the legal-political discourse, the other parties accept it and put it into circulation for a corresponding reason.
 And the next time that provision is mentioned, the party to the conflict that is no longer in favor of the provision and / or thinks that there is an alternative to rejecting the provision can no longer appeal the circulation of the false provision in the legal discourse, as it will be accused of inconsistency. (arbitrarily).
  And this is how a legal-political discourse estopel is formulated.
 The false provision accepted in the legal-political discourse is more substantiated when it is applied more than once.
  The legitimacy of this use is permanently based on its own previous uses, and with each subsequent use, it further strengthens its position in circulation.
  In other words, every application of an untrue construct raises the level of its legitimacy, on the one hand forgetting and ignoring its essence, and on the other hand making it a presumable, reliable proposition.
 Both the process of formation of the estopel itself and the legitimization of the accepted false provisions can be carried out both through explicit and silent "popularizations".
  It is quite possible that the imposing party will express the 507 PHILOSOPHY's intentions, and the enforced agent will accept the imposition by default, in the same way that estopel occurs in litigation as a consensus silence.
 Just as the waiver of the right to appeal in legal proceedings allows and / or enforces the use of Estopel, so the false view of legal-political discourse is legitimized because the other parties to the conflict accept it implicitly.
 It is not superfluous to mention that the legitimized untrue structures do not exist only in the legal-political discourse.
  They operate in the discourses of all spheres of human activity, receiving different roles and positions from context to context.
  Legitimized untruths can be found in the discourses of all forms of spiritual culture, as well as in the conflicting points of their borders.
 Thus, it is a textbook truth that any discipline (or science) should have its object of study.
  The existence of an object of scientific study is a mandatory (but not sufficient) condition for the given classification to be qualified as such.
  The importance of a scientific discipline object is not conditioned only by making the given discipline meaningful, but (almost always) the categorical apparatus of the given scientific discipline, research approaches, toolkit, etc. are conditioned by the object.
  It can be said that the existence and essence of any discipline is mostly conditioned by the object of its study.
  Despite this undeniable importance of the object of study, there are currently disciplines whose neither the existence nor the essence of the object of study is known.
 "Some representatives of science have even loved and like to cocoon (ееголять) with such thoughts. I present to you a teaching about liquids, and whether they exist or not, it is not my job ... [9, p. 36].
 This attitude of scientists, regardless of whether it is a positive or negative phenomenon, has a serious justification.
 508 PHILOSOPHY In fact, the existence of such a view is not only completely possible, but as scientific practice shows, this situation is sometimes inevitable.
  Thus, no one doubts that, for example, the psychology of suicide is not only a discipline, but also a very important field of work, the existence of which is vital for any society.
  The bright proofs of this public conviction are the works of a number of serious scientists, the awarding of academic-scientific titles in this field, and, most importantly, the existence of this course in universities (in Armenia and elsewhere, also in the state).
  The fact that suicide psychology is a science is considered indisputable, but the analyzes allow us to claim that the question of who or what is "... the object of study of suicide psychology" remains unanswered [1, 160 pages].
  In fact, the psychology of suicide is at least tacitly declared a discipline (academic science), but it is clear that a discipline can not be considered as such if the object of its study is uncertain.
  This paradoxical situation is known to a number of leading specialists of this discipline, as well as the leaders coordinating the teaching of the discipline, and others, but no one rejects the psychology of suicide, considering it a non-scientific (non-academic) subject.
  Therefore, the judgment expressed in person or in direct text that the psychology of suicide is an academic science is a legitimate untrue construct.
 The situation is almost the same in the case of some forms of spiritual and cultural conflicts.
  For example, it has been shown time and again that no discipline (including the natural sciences) can itself oppose religions to refute the claims of their beliefs.
  On the contrary, T. Koon showed that any (natural) scientific study is preceded by a number of worldview elements of the scientific community (and the researcher in question), including the so-called metaphysical paradigm or metaphysical parts of the paradigm.
 509 PHILOSOPHY The latter can be changed by influencing the data of scientific research, but the metaphysical paradigm is always primary and (or also) it is conditioned by both the acquisition and coordination of scientific data and scientific conclusions.
  A number of serious thinkers in this field do not agree with Kuni on many issues, including K. Popper, I. Lakatos, P. Feyrabend and others, but all agree, that scientific study is preceded by extra-scientific (worldview) elements, including the religious (or anti-religious) views of a given community of scholars [see pages 3, 28-30 ].
 It can be said that the current scientific picture of the world is atheistic.
  That is, the collective totality of scientific theories that currently reflect the essence of the world, unlike, say, the Middle Ages, neither represents a deity nor aspires to leave room for a possible deity.
  Such a direction of the scientific "mosaic" of the world is substantiated by the methodological regulators of science, which are called to ensure the objectivity of science.
  The principles of causality and simplicity play an important role here, the first of which requires the subject of cognition not to go beyond nature when explaining natural phenomena, and the second forbids the subject to add to the scientific picture of the world.
 These two requirements are "... two different explicit expressions of the same principle of objectivity of scientific knowledge [10, p. 150] ».
  These demands not to leave the borders of nature and not to add unnecessary objects are completely acceptable and understandable.
  Violation of these will deprive scientific knowledge of being like that.
 But a violation of these principles should not be considered as a mere case when the scientific community tries to prove the existence of God in scientific discourse or interference in the processes of the natural world.
  The counter-argument of the latter also violates.
  In that sense, it is possible for the scientific community to deny the existence of God.
  In case of both proving and denying the proof, there is a gross violation of the principle of objectivity. The subject of cognition goes beyond the bounds of nature to discuss the question of the existence / non-existence of an object which, in principle, can not be given to it either within the bounds of science or reason in general.
 In spite of all this, concepts continue to circulate in the scientific discourse, which in the name of science try to refute such religious propositions, for the verification of which science does not provide any opportunity, nor are they in the field of scientific research at all.
  And this fact cannot but be known first of all to the community of scientists.
 Scientific discourse is also currently circulating elements that expressly or directly express the complete refutation of facts recorded in other disciplines without discussing the possibility of their being / not being true [see pages 2, 21], clearly realizing the unfoundedness of such an approach.
 This situation (more acutely) is manifested in both inter-religious and inter-religious relations.
  At present, he publicly announces the so-called neighborly relations of the sister churches.
  It is clear that there would be no neighborly or other quality foreign relations if those "sister churches" were not separated from each other.
  And the division of the traditional churches has historically taken place as a result of hostile events, which have been accompanied by violence and murders, mutual curses and accusations.
 These ordinances are still not repealed and are officially announced during the relevant ceremonies.
  Religious leaders are well aware of all this and often express it in public, but they accept each other as "sister churches" as opposed to "evil" sects.
  The concept of a "sister church" is generally both historically and logically untrue, but because of the overlap of interests, this concept has been adopted and legitimized.
 Such a historical and logical false concept is also the principle of tolerance from the point of view of any religion.
  Every follower of every religion, based on the content of its own belief, considers (and calls) a perfect blasphemy any other religion.
  From the point of view of Islam and Judaism, any Christian is blasphemous because he is convinced that God has a Son (even if we leave aside the fact that the Son and the Holy Spirit are God).
  For every Jewish Christian and Muslim, a prophet (or God) who persecutes and kills a prophet who opposes the truth is blasphemous because he killed Jesus Christ, the God of Christians and one of the great prophets of Muslims.
  All Muslims are blasphemers for both Christians and Jews [see pages 3, 19-20] because an obsessive, ignorant, insane, money-loving murderer who falsified the entire biblical tradition solely for his own gain and obsession. , proclaimed a prophet.
 The leaders and conscious followers of all three religions are well aware of all this, but since sometimes the interests coincide, and sometimes there is no direct alternative, they advocate universal brotherhood, humanity and, of course, tolerance.
  All this makes it clear that for a conscious religious person, the concept of tolerating another religion is a legitimized untrue ideology.
 Thus, it can be concluded that the legitimized untrue structures exist not only in the discourse of legal-political, but also in all spheres of human activity.
 .
