The analysis of the external environment, internal resources and capabilities of the existing organization pursues the dual goal of identifying possible strategic alternatives and formulating the criterion for selecting the best option.
 Commodity market investment strategy defines the investment decision and answers the question of where to compete.
  Is it necessary to expand or shrink the existing business sector (Boston Consulting Group Matrix)?
 In what direction of growth should the investments be made?
 Has a new, attractive field of business emerged (Ansoff's matrix "product-market")?
 Does the strategy of achieving competitive advantage answer the question of how to compete?
 GOVERNANCE Which basic strategy for achieving competitive advantage is fully relevant to the market situation and the capabilities of the organization?
 What should be the positioning strategy, the promotion of goods to the market - commodity, go or other strategy?
 What resources and areas of activity need to be included in order for the strategy to be implemented?
 Commodity Market Investment Strategies Leaving the Market (for "Dogs") "Get the Cream" Boston (for Cows) Advisory Maintain a Market Matrix (Problem for Commodities) Matrix Enter Market / Growth (for Star Products) Market Development New Markets Ansofi New Products Matrix Diversification Competitiveness Strategy Basic Strategies.  low costs,  stratification, իզ focus, ը first come in,  synergism.
 Functional strategies (GPA, production, delivery, marketing, finance, etc.).
 Resources and areas of activity. Selection criteria, Opportunity Opportunity / environmental threats /.
 145 MANAGEMENT Ensuring competitive advantage. Օգտագործ Utilizing the firm's strengths and weaknesses;, Neutralizing the firm's weaknesses and competitors' strengths.
 In accordance with the goals of the organization.  Achieve the given long-term indicators; ապահով Ensure the combination of goals and benefits.
 Implementation of the strategy. Բավարար Sufficient amount of available resources; համատեղ Combination of strategy and internal organization.
 Accounting for interaction with other strategies of the enterprise. Հան portfolio balancing,  strategy feasibility accounting, օգտագործ synergistic efficiency utilization.
 An important issue when choosing a competitive strategy is the coordination of functional and other strategies, their direction to achieve the common goal.
  The organization for its development may have several alternatives for this or that version of changing the external environment.
  In this case, the internal capabilities of the organization, the product life cycle, the state of production systems and the level of economic development of the organization, the availability of financial resources can act as an internal constraint. The responsibility of managers and all staff in the implementation of the developed strategy.
  In addition, the role of the organization's management culture, managers' experience in implementing strategic decisions and other factors play a big role.
  It is clear that changes that affect strategy choices are difficult to quantify in practice, they are reciprocal, they are poorly controlled, and it is difficult to assess uncertainty and risk.
  In real life, the possible strategies of the organization, as a rule, do not exclude each other and can be combined in different ways.
  When making alternative decisions, it is necessary to take into account the capabilities of the organization, as they may not have enough resources to develop a number of alternatives at the same time.
  In addition, detailed calculation and planning of several alternatives can be effective if only one decision needs to be made.
  In that case, it is possible to start work on two or three alternatives, but to implement them only at the design level.
  In our opinion, this will allow collecting a large amount of factual data and focusing on one option to more accurately assess the chosen alternative.
  In principle, another approach is possible, in which case an alternative strategy is developed in depth.
  If in the future it may be insufficient for some reason, a transition to the development of another strategy is carried out, and so on.
 It is obvious that none of the mentioned approaches guarantees that it is possible to find a perfect solution.
  However, in real life the choice is made under the influence of limited time, financial, human and other factors.
  The decision may be perfectly within reach, but time or expense may prevent it 2, p. 94-95.
  Often the first step in strategy development can be the mission of the organization, whose role is to propose and discuss various proposals in the mission decision process, ie the mission can be a means of reproducing and selecting a strategic alternative.
  Usually the definition of the mission is logically followed by the analysis of the external environment and the activities of the organization.
 But it is often helpful to decide on a mission first. MANAGEMENT  Adjust the level of coverage of the external environment analysis after defining the mission; սահմանումը Define the mission to give an idea of ​​the organization's standards and growth directions.
 In order to form strategic alternatives, first of all, it is necessary to analyze the important strategic factors, based on the current situation.
  As a result of this work, it is possible to identify the need to clarify the mission of the current goals of the organization.
 Practice ensures that the organization should analyze as much as possible the sphere of its activity, where it can realize its competitive advantage and ensure high income.
  As a result of such an analysis, it is possible to make a decision to leave a number of business sectors and sell relevant assets, or, conversely, to expand some areas of business by adding similar organizations to the corporate portfolio.
  In this case, the business portfolio should be balanced with usage (for example, the Boston Advisory Group approach).
 It should be noted that the reason for the separation or sale of separate business units from the organization may be: Ված Adaptation to changes in economic conditions within the new market strategy,  when the business unit can not be used effectively, as in the case of a separate company;  Previously incorrectly made investment decision correction experience; որոշ Profitable sale decision of a previously unprofitable organization The value has increased due to the art of management or other factors;  getting rid of loss-making business;
 ։ There is a theory of absorption and merger in the economic literature, which reveals the external reasons for business expansion.
  These include: փոքր Reducing risk, cost or time to expand market share; լրացուցիչ Benefiting from other firms' additional opportunities;  Free access to critical resources and portfolios; ստանալ Benefiting more than starting a new business from scratch within an existing organization .
 If absorption is envisaged, the strategy should be to identify favorable opportunities and decisions of the absorption candidate.
  The development of transaction tactics begins, after which the strategy of completing the activity and merging the organizational structure is developed in order to realize the benefit of the event.
  Integration can be a difficult task, as the unification of organizations, although complementary from a strategic point of view, but they can have a corporate culture, management style. Big differences in organizational structure.
 Therefore, there are many strategic alternatives in every organization, the adoption of which is also a difficult task.
  The possible criteria for making strategic decision-making alternatives can be grouped into six groups.
 Strategic alternatives need to be assessed in order to determine whether they meet the capabilities and threats of the external environment (external analysis).
 In order to achieve a competitive advantage that is part or foundation of a strategy, it is necessary to use the resources and scope of the organization.
  149 MANAGEMENT The strategy chosen by the speech must be appropriate to the external environment, the purpose of the organization, be feasible and not contradict other strategies of the organization.
 When choosing a strategy in the organization, as noted by I. Ansof 1, p. 126, "Contradictions arise between three groups of orientations: long-term, short-term profitability and sales volume, profitability and management flexibility, management flexibility and synergy."
 How is the best competitive strategic decision made? 1. Perhaps the most important criterion is how the proposed strategy relates to the strategic factors obtained from the SWOT analysis.
  If strategic alternatives do not take advantage of the organization's external capabilities and key strengths, as well as external threats and organizational weaknesses, it is likely to be doomed to failure.
 2. When choosing a strategy, the following questions are important: is it possible for the strategic alternative to achieve the previously set goals, is it in line with the corporate mission?
 3. It is necessary to make sure that the functional strategies that support the given strategic alternative are interrelated.
 4. The essence of the next question is whether the level of income and profit from the investment to support the market share assumed within the strategic plan is sufficient.
 5. It is necessary to assess the degree of risk of this strategic alternative if it is a question of attracting large assets.
 GOVERNANCE 6. It is necessary to assess the response of different stakeholders in a given microenvironment to a given strategic alternative.
 In recent years, the method of assessing potential economic activity has become widespread, so for each alternative that predetermines the future of the company, a scene is developed in detail, which envisages three cases of change in the situation: optimistic, pessimistic and probable.
 If the scenes adequately reflect the attitude of management, risk, external and internal environment, personal interests of top managers, then they are an effective tool, help managers choose a strategic alternative and best contribute to the company's goal.
 It is clear that the use of these methods will enable the adoption of management decisions that will increase the effectiveness of strategic management.
 .
