This article examines the issues of the place and significance of the acts of the Eurasian Economic Union in the legal system of the Republic of Armenia.
  In particular, the author refers to the Treaty of the Eurasian Economic Union of May 29, 2014 and several dozen agreements directly related to the latter, as well as the decisions adopted by the bodies of that union.
  The article presents the author's approaches to those acts in the context of the RA legal acts system.
 Based on the results of the systematic and comprehensive analysis of the norms enshrined in Articles 5, 13, 19, 47, 116, 132 and other Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, the Republic of Armenia has the right to participate in the preparation and adoption of legal acts aimed at normalization of international legal relations. and implementation.
 Within the framework of the Eurasian Economic Union, it is necessary to emphasize and at the same time determine the nature of the legal acts of that organization.
  Moreover, due to the obligation to perform these acts, or due to the model and consulting nature, the procedure for implementation of international legal acts regulating the relations in the field under study, the procedure requiring the adoption of domestic legal acts conditioned by these acts, other acts of the International Legal Acts and the Eurasian Economic Union. 285 JURISDICTION issues of the ratio of national legal acts, as well as the legal status of the bodies of that organization, the scope of their powers, etc.
 Of course, the Eurasian Economic Union can really claim the role of one of the centers (poles) of world economic and political power, if it can realize all the opportunities reserved for it.
 It should be noted that the legal relations of the Eurasian Economic Union member states are based on such fundamental acts as the legal basis, such as the Eurasian Economic Union Treaty of May 29, 2014, which is part of the law of the Eurasian Economic Union 1, international treaties concluded within that union. , the international treaties of the Union with a third party, as well as the decisions and orders of the Supreme Eurasian Economic Council, the Eurasian Intergovernmental Council and the Eurasian Economic Commission, adopted within the scope of their powers under the Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union and international treaties concluded within that Union. 6).
 Moreover, the central place in the legal system of the Eurasian Economic Union belongs to the Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union (hereinafter referred to as the Treaty), which defines the organizational and legal bases for the establishment of that union.
  In particular, Article 6 1 1 of that Treaty clearly states that the decisions of the Supreme Eurasian Economic Council and the Eurasian Intergovernmental Council shall be enforceable by the Member States in accordance with their national law.
 At the same time, according to Part 4 of the same article, the decisions of the Supreme Eurasian Economic Council prevail over the Eurasian Intergovernmental Council and the Eurasian See Agreement on the Eurasian Economic Union. M.
  2015. С. 496. 286 JURISDICTION over the decisions of the Economic Commission, and the decisions of the Eurasian Intergovernmental Council take precedence over the decisions of the Eurasian Economic Commission.
 In other words, from the substantive analysis of the mentioned norms, it should be noted that the legal basis of the Eurasian Economic Union does not define the ratio of legal acts adopted within that union to national legal systems, which also implies that they are partially defined in the hierarchy and legal force of such acts. The mechanisms for implementing the decisions adopted by the bodies of the Eurasian Economic Union are not sufficiently regulated.
 It should also be noted that the need for legal regulation of relations between the legal systems of the Eurasian Economic Union member states, the elaboration of legal acts, their further study and regulation require the formation of a common legal area, the effectiveness of legal acts of the Union and the interaction of national systems with the legal system. in-depth research.
 Given that the Eurasian Economic Union is an international organization for regional economic integration, which has an international legal entity (Article 1, part 2), it should also be noted that the Eurasian Economic Union has not only this right, but also the same union. within the limits and volumes envisaged by international agreements concluded within the framework of this framework (Article 6).
 Of course, the holders of this authority are the bodies operating within the framework of the Eurasian Economic Union Treaty (Article 8), such as: a) the Supreme Eurasian Economic Council (hereinafter referred to as the Supreme Council), b) the Eurasian Intergovernmental Council (hereinafter referred to as the Intermediate Council) (E) The Eurasian Economic Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission); (d) The Court of the Eurasian Economic Union (hereinafter referred to as the Court of the Union).
  Moreover, these bodies, within the scope of their authorities, adopt orders, which are perceived by the mentioned contract as organizational and regulatory acts, as well as acts containing normative legal provisions in the form of decisions (Article 2).
 At the same time, it should be noted that the systematic analysis of Articles 2, 8-19 regulating the powers of the bodies of that organization under the mentioned agreement shows that the system of acts adopted by those bodies has a certain hierarchy.
  Thus, the decisions and orders of the bodies of the Eurasian Economic Union in accordance with Article 3-4, Parts 3-4 of the same Treaty shall not contradict the Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union and the international treaties concluded within that Union, as well as the Eurasian Economic Council, the Eurasian Intergovernmental Council and In case of any discrepancies between the decisions of the Eurasian Economic Commission, the decisions of the Supreme Eurasian Economic Council shall prevail over the decisions of the Eurasian Intergovernmental Council and the Eurasian Economic Commission, and the decisions of the Eurasian Intergovernmental Council shall prevail over the decisions of the Eurasian Economic Commission.
 Of course, the system of legal acts of the Eurasian Economic Union needs to understand the basics of the legislation of the Eurasian Economic Union, international treaties concluded by member states, decisions of the bodies of that union within their competence, other normative legal acts that form the legal basis of that organization.
 288 JURISDICTION At the same time, taking into account the normative significance of the acts of that international organization, they can be conditionally divided into two groups: internal organizational issues (internal regulation) and direct implementation of the Eurasian Economic Union goals (external regulation) 2.
 Thus, the first group of the mentioned acts refers to the adoption of the rules of procedure, the rules of conduct of the staff, and the establishment of other norms regulating the activities of the international organization, obligatory for the bodies of that organization and the member states.
  These include the decisions of the bodies of the Eurasian Economic Union, which define the structure and directions of activities of the bodies of the Eurasian Union, the relations between those bodies, the order of appointment, the status of officials and service bodies of the Eurasian Economic Union and other internal organizational issues.
 The second group should include the acts adopted in the field of direct implementation of the goals of the Eurasian Economic Union (external regulation), which are addressed to the member states and define between them, as well as the scope of powers in relations with third countries and international organizations.
 In addition, the Eurasian Economic Union acquires the power to establish norms of international law of an external nature by regulating the relevant provisions of the founding act of that international organization or by ratifying the relevant international treaty.
 In the context of what has been said, it is necessary to attach importance to it. Ю., Четвериков А.О. Право Евразийского экономического 289 JURISDICTION that in accordance with Articles 13 and 17 of the Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union, the decisions and orders of both the Supreme Council and the Intergovernmental Council shall be adopted by consensus.
 At the same time, the legal acts adopted within the framework of the Eurasian Economic Union conditioned by their functional significance can be classified: - acts which are subject to harmonization and harmonization in the national law of the Member States of the Union.
  The existence of such acts is conditioned by the fact that they are adopted with the participation of all member states for the immediate realization of the goals of the Eurasian Economic Union, the implementation of which is carried out by the adoption of national legal acts by the same states - advisory acts of purely advisory nature. Conclusions and clarifications.
  In the case of such acts, the member states of the Union shall, in the interests of the country, independently determine the necessity and expediency of the implementation of such acts in national law and practice - and finally the internal acts which may be adopted by resolutions, orders and other forms whose application is limited. By the activities of the staffs of the Eurasian Economic Union bodies.
 However, referring to the consideration of the place and significance of the legal acts of the Eurasian Economic Union in the legal system of the Republic of Armenia, it is necessary to note the following: The Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union, as a founding act of an international organization, stipulates that the member states independently decide when, in what order, what national normative legal acts they may adopt, in compliance with the acts of the bodies of the same organization, and define them in the territory of the Republic of Armenia. liquidity frameworks.
 290 JURISDICTION However, it is also necessary to take into account the fact that Article 1 of the Treaty stipulates that the Republic of Armenia's Treaty of May 29, 2014 and the Republic of Armenia Treaty of the Eurasian Economic Union of 2014 The application of certain norms of other international treaties mentioned in Annex 1 to the Treaty on Accession of May 29, 2006 shall be carried out in accordance with the terms and transitional provisions of Annex 3 to the Republic of Armenia on issues related to the accession to the World Trade Organization3.
 This means that the Republic of Armenia undertakes to implement the decisions and orders of the Supreme Council of the Eurasian Economic Union and the Intergovernmental Council in its territory from the date of entry into force of the Treaty.
 From the date of entry into force of the Treaty on the Eurasian Economic Union, the acts of the bodies of the Eurasian Economic Union, as well as the decisions of the Supreme Eurasian Economic Council (Supreme Council of the Eurasian Economic Community), the Eurasian Decisions of the Economic Commission (Customs Union Commission) taking into account the provisions set out in Annex 3 to the Treaty (Article 2 of the Treaty).
 It should be noted that the binding normative legal acts of the bodies of the Eurasian Economic Union are implemented both in the Republic of Armenia and in the other member states of the Eurasian Economic Union by enshrining them in domestic legal normative acts and giving legal force.
 See also: Bekyshev KA, Moiseev EG Law of the Eurasian Economic Union, 291 JURISDICTION Of course, the structures of legal regulation of interstate relations within the Eurasian Economic Union are defined by constitutional norms.
 Despite the fact that the acts of the Eurasian Economic Union were not presented in a special way by the hierarchy of the acts of the national legislation of the Republic of Armenia, nevertheless, it becomes obvious that all international legal acts, including the acts of the Eurasian Economic Union subject to ratification, are ratified by the National Assembly. they do not contradict the RA Constitution (Article 116, parts 1-2).
 However, the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia enshrines provisions that are indirectly related to the Eurasian Economic Union, defining the place of the acts of that union in the national legal system.
  In particular, by virtue of Part 3 of Article 5 of the Constitution, one of the key principles of the hierarchy of legal norms is that in case of conflict between the acts and laws of the Eurasian Economic Union ratified by the Republic of Armenia, the norms of international treaties are applied.
 And in accordance with the logic of Part 1 of Article 116 of the same Constitution, the National Assembly ratifies, suspends or annuls the acts of the Eurasian Economic Union, which relate to the basic human and civil rights and freedoms, as well as obligations, provide financial or property liabilities for the Republic of Armenia, etc.
  According to part 3 of the same article. International treaties that contradict the Constitution cannot be ratified.
 Or, in accordance with the requirements of Article 81 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, when interpreting the provisions of the Constitution on basic human and civil rights and freedoms enshrined in the Constitution, one takes into account the bodies ratified by the Eurasian Economic Union, including the Court of the Eurasian Economic Union. practice.
 From the system analysis of the mentioned norms we can conclude the following: - In terms of cooperation between international law and domestic law in the Republic of Armenia, in contrast to the 2005 edition of the RA Constitution, the legal system of the country lacks the inclusion of universally recognized principles and norms of international law, which does not mean that the Republic of Armenia is based on the same principles and norms. does not bear any obligation.
  These principles are, after all, of universal importance to all UN member states, and on the one hand, their source is the international treaties themselves, and on the other hand, they are universal and popular, without mentioning the source and existence of these principles.
 - In the Republic of Armenia, the validity of the acts of the Eurasian Economic Union is recognized over the norms of the supreme national legislation, if there is a contradiction in them.
 - The acts of the Eurasian Economic Union that contradict the Constitution in the Republic of Armenia cannot be ratified, therefore, their norms are not subject to implementation and application.
 Hence, in the territory of the Republic of Armenia, the RA Constitution has priority over the acts of the Eurasian Economic Union, but in accordance with the hierarchy of legal norms, those acts have precedence over national laws.
 .
