The Republic of Armenia, like many countries, does not recognize the human right to die - euthanasia.
  There are two types of euthanasia: active and passive.
  Both types of euthanasia are prohibited in the Republic of Armenia and a person who commits euthanasia is liable in accordance with the RA Criminal Code.
 70 JURISDICTION Article 24 of the RA Constitution stipulates that a person has the right to life and if a person has the right to life, why shouldn't he also have the right to die.
 The approaches of people to this issue are always different, the positions of the courts of different countries, but in recent years the positions of the ECHR on this issue have changed dramatically.
 Euthanasia was first legalized in the Netherlands in 2002, but in order to exercise the "right to die" a number of conditions are required: the patient must suffer from an incurable disease, suffer from unbearable pain, have little chance of recovery and be mentally healthy.
 Euthanasia is legal in the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, some US states, Luxembourg, Colombia and a number of other countries.
 When we talk about euthanasia, we often come across the moral side of this phenomenon and come to contradictions.
  If a person claims to have the "right to die", then he has reasons for it: a deadly disease, inability to walk or speak after an event, and, as a result, a feeling of being useless to himself, his family or society.
  But at the same time, he also has the right to life and the person must decide for himself whether to exercise his right to die or to live, otherwise he gets the obligation to live.
 Euthanasia was recently performed in Belgium against Marika Vermouth, the champion of the London Paralympic Games.
  He had paralyzed the limbs of his arms and legs, and over the years the disease progressed, causing him severe pain.
  Vermouth has always defended the right of people to euthanasia, saying that "if euthanasia is legalized in every country, there will be fewer suicides."
  "Sport is the only meaning of my life.
  It is very difficult for me to fight against the disease and train, the 2016 games are my last dream.
  I am not a funeral and 71 JURISDICTION.
 "It is enough for me that everyone drinks a glass of champagne and thinks about me," he said after the 2016 Olympic Games and wanted to be euthanized.
  This is a common procedure in Belgium, the person must get the consent of three doctors and he got it.
 Shortly after Marika Vermouth's announcement, 14-year-old American Jerryka Bohlen [2] expressed a wish to die.
  The girl was suffering from spinal muscular atrophy, she had 30 surgeries and she confessed that she was no longer able to live.
  The teenager asked to be satisfied with his decision on euthanasia.
  Moreover, Jericho's family, his mother, and his grandmother supported her.
  His wish also came true.
 Recently, an English court heard a dispute between the parents of a child with a disability and a medical clinic.
  The child has suffered from spinal muscular atrophy since the day of birth.
 In the history of England, doctors, without the consent of the child's parents, decided to turn off the device that supports the life of a 3.5-month-old child.
  However, the court acquitted the doctors, stating that the doctors' actions were dictated by the child's severe suffering and lack of hope for his recovery.
 AND finally in 1939. The famous psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud, who had been suffering from a tumor of the mouth since 1923, underwent euthanasia, underwent 31 surgeries, and in the end his pain became unbearable and he underwent active euthanasia at his request.
 However. There is also an opposite approach.
  In France, a lawsuit was filed against a local resident after the end of euthanasia.
 Vincent Lambert was in a vegetative state for more than ten years after a serious accident.
  At the request of the woman, on July 11, 2019, the man's life support system was turned off at Reim Hospital and he died.
  Lambert's parents were opposed to such measures.
  They were Catholics and appealed to the court, which called into question the observance of euthanasia.
  It is noteworthy that even the Vatican responded to the case of Vincent Lambert euthanasia and wrote: "Let us not build a civilization that destroys people," Pope Francis wrote on Twitter.
  The patriarch urged to value the life of each person.
 So, does a seriously ill person who is fully aware of his condition at the end of his life have the right to voluntarily demand to exercise his right to die, what to do when a person is unable to say what he wants due to illness or to live? to die.
  In this case, this responsible decision should be made by relatives, for whom it is difficult to make a decision on euthanasia, they believe that killing a person is immoral, but on the other hand, it turns out to allow him to suffer.
 Recently, the number of countries legalizing euthanasia has expanded.
  2017 Victoria was the first in Australia to legalize euthanasia.
  The law on legalization of euthanasia in South Korea came into force in mid-2019.
  The parliamentarians adopted the document after almost 100 hours of discussions.
  The bill was submitted to the governor for royal approval.
  "I am proud to have placed compassion at the center of our parliamentary and political process," said President Daniel Andrews.
 In Colombia, in the spring of 2015, the Constitutional Court ruled on the legalization of euthanasia.
 2017 The Colombian parliament passed a bill to legalize euthanasia.
 The position of the ECHR on this issue is very interesting, in particular, in 2002. In one of its judgments, the Court's claim that the right to life includes the right to die, the Court replied that Article 2 of the Convention stated that the State's obligation to protect life did not apply to decisions to dispose of its own life and that Article 2 could not interpreted linguistic distortions in such a way that 73 JURISDICTION gives a diametrically opposite right to die 1 [9].
 As early as 2011, the ECHR allowed euthanasia and suicide.
  and argued that it follows from a person's right to privacy protected by Article 8 of the Convention.
  In particular, he mentioned that a person can decide for himself how and at what moment his life will end, if he is able to make such a decision independently2.
  However, this only referred to the cases when the patient was able to express his opinion on that issue.
 Then in 2012 The ECtHR changed its position in the following two cases: Koch v. Germany 3 [11] and Gross v. Switzerland 4 [12].
  The study shows that the problem of euthanasia has not exhausted itself and needs to be studied again.
 In particular, the court in Koch v. Germany refused to grant the applicants permission to assist in suicide, and in the case of Gross v. Switzerland, on the contrary, it allowed euthanasia to be applied to a person, even if he was not terminally ill.
  Both cases relate to cases where patients want state support to deprive them of their lives.
 Already in 2013 The European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) investigated another case in which it stated specific principles in Swiss law that the plaintiff was suffering from a fatal motor-neurone degenerative disease that had paralyzed him below the neck.
  She wanted her husband to help her commit suicide.
 Hass had been suffering from biopolar mental illness for 20 years and had attempted suicide twice.
  He considered that his illness needed a long treatment and ruled out a dignified life.
 Koch was paralyzed and her husband wanted to take a lethal medicine from the doctors and was refused.
  Madame Koch and her husband, not receiving a solution to the problem in Germany, go to Sweden, where they organized her suicide. Madame Gross is experiencing a natural aging process, but she has no strength to resist.
  He wants the doctors to give him a deadly medicine and finds that it comes from his right to dignity and the state is obliged to provide him with all the conditions for suicide and a safe and passed death.
 JURISDICTION on the absence of euthanasia and the circumstances under which the applicant is not terminally ill but tired of life [13].
 Recently, the German Constitutional Court ruled that banning commercial activities for euthanasia violated the Constitution.
  According to the court decision, a German citizen has a constitutional right to die voluntarily, including committing suicide or using someone's help to die.
  The court found that the current ban violates the rights of seriously ill people and doctors.
 Now a new law will be drafted in the country, which will regulate the work of companies and doctors providing euthanasia services.
  Some doctors have expressed concern that lifting the ban would lead to premature euthanasia.
  The ban on euthanasia companies in Germany has been in force since 2015.
 It is difficult to accept the concept of euthanasia in Armenia, because our religion is against euthanasia.
  "The desire to be better than God is arrogance," the church insists.
 However, there are times when euthanasia is a necessity and by not using it we treat people much more cruelly, leaving them to suffer.
  Can a person wishing to die be barred from exercising his right to die and tortured?
  Could a person decide for himself to end his life?
  Is euthanasia a suicide that the church opposes and is considered a sin?
 If we rely only on the facts that euthanasia helps a person suffering from pain, then it turns out that we must regulate these legal relations by law.
  However, this is not so unequivocal, as otherwise everyone would be in favor of euthanasia.
  Discussing the disadvantages of euthanasia, we note that it will always conflict with the right to life, endangering human life.
  Article 24 of the RA Constitution, according to which everyone has the right to life and no one can be deprived of life arbitrarily.
  On the one hand, it turns out that euthanasia contradicts the constitutional norm, because a person loses his life and in fact he no longer has the right to life, and on the other hand, if he has the right to life, he must also have the right to die.
 In the case of voluntary euthanasia, there is no problem with this norm at all, as this constitutional norm refers to the prohibition of deprivation of life in any form against one's will.
 Because, according to various international treaties and case law, the right to life is not absolute and in some cases may be subject to restrictions, so there is no problem here.
  The problem concerns cases of euthanasia when the opinion of the deceased is not known due to the inability or inability to express an opinion.
  These cases are more problematic, whether another person, the parent of the deceased or another relative, can decide to take the life of another person.
 Unlike the countries that have legalized euthanasia, Armenia not only does not legalize euthanasia by law, but on the contrary, considers that this act is subject to criminal liability.
 In particular, according to Article 23 of the RA Law on Medical Care and Services for the Population, euthanasia is prohibited in Armenia, the acceleration of death by any action and means, at the request of the patient.
  Those who consciously push the patient to euthanasia or perform it are responsible in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Armenia.
  In fact, euthanasia is unacceptable at the legislative level.
  In general, the use and legalization of euthanasia depends on society, religious beliefs, cultural values, traditions, and other aspects.
 In fact, both religious and traditional values ​​have a profound effect on society.
  To find out how the Armenian society relates to euthanasia, 76 JURISDICTION A social survey was conducted in Armenia.
  The study group were RA citizens aged 18-35.
  Surveys show that 23 percent of respondents are against euthanasia, 25 abstain and 52 are in favor of 5 [15].
  This speaks to the fact that the approaches and legislation on euthanasia in Armenia must be changed.
 In this situation, the doctor bears serious responsibility both to the patient and to himself, but on the other hand, is it humane to condemn the person to suffering?
  "I will honestly answer, no, it is not humanitarian.
  Humanism demands that a person not suffer.
  That is why there is pain relief, psychotherapy, psychologist help, "says Newta Fedemerser.
 He once wrote that when a person is in comfortable conditions, he stops asking for euthanasia.
  "I have witnessed this in Belgium, when patients with ALS [20] choose life precisely because of the maximum comfort conditions reminiscent of seaside resorts."
 In our opinion, euthanasia should be considered by the state as a protection of the right to freedom from torture and the right to die, as a fundamental human right.
 However, the grounds and procedure for euthanasia must be clearly defined in order to exclude the sale of human organs, tissues and other risks.
 The "right to die" should be granted only to those suffering from incurable disease, excruciating pain, and suffering so great that it is impossible to endure and it is difficult to diagnose amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
  In this case, it would be right to set up an independent commission and apply euthanasia only on the basis of the commission's conclusion.
 .
