Despite the fact that the Republic of Armenia had established diplomatic and consular institutions in many countries, on the eve of the sovietization of Armenia, the number of foreign representations operating in Armenia was very limited.
  1920 After the sovietization of Armenia on December 2, 1922. The formation of the Transcaucasian Federation on March 12, 1918, the Soviet Socialist Republic of Armenia (USSR) had certain elements of its 339 HISTORY, one of the manifestations of which was the presence of its own diplomatic and consular missions abroad.
 There were also foreign missions in Soviet Armenia, with which the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs maintained relations on behalf of the Armenian SSR through the head of the consular department and secretary of the People's Commissariat Mihran Khojamiryan.
  With the latter's signature, the People's Commissariat issued relevant certificates to the employees of the latter's diplomatic missions traveling to Turkey or Persia.
  The People's Commissariat also corresponded with the Extraordinary Commission of the USSR regarding the issuance of permits to travelers abroad [6, p. 31 et seq., 170; 13, թ. 41, 45, 53, 54, 58; 14, թ. 15, 48].
 In order to regulate the relations of Soviet Armenian institutions and individual citizens with foreign missions in the country, the Foreign Affairs Committee of the USSR established a special procedure according to which no institution or servant had the right to enter into official relations with foreign diplomatic missions and consulates without the consent and permission of the People's Commissariat. 21, p. 364].
  In fact, the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Armenian SSR reserved for itself the "monopoly" of relations with foreign missions.
  A similar order existed in Soviet Russia.
  In its relations with foreign representations in the country, the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Armenian SSR was guided by the procedure in force in the USSR (in particular, the Charter on Consular Representations of Foreign Countries Accredited to the Government of the USSR, adopted on June 30, 1921) [21, pp. 398-399].
 During the Soviet era, the diplomatic and consular missions of the Republic of Georgia, Soviet Russia, Persia 340 HISTORY and Kemalist Turkey functioned in Armenia.
 On the eve of the sovietization of Armenia, Menshevik Georgia had a representation in Yerevan and a consulate in Gharakilisa.
  In the days following the sovietization, the Georgian representation continued to operate in Yerevan under the leadership of General Karalov.
  The Georgian consulate in Gharakilisa was established in 1920. during the Turkish-Armenian war.
 1920 After the arrest of Boris Legrand's train in Tbilissi (Georgia) on the night of December 5, 2006 by the order of the Revolutionary Committee of Armenia, the Extraordinary Commission of the Armenian SSR took the Georgian government representative and the employees of the representation under house arrest.
  Only after the issue was settled, by the order of Alexander Bekzadyan, the Foreign Minister of the Armenian SSR, on December 17, the members of the Georgian representation were released from house arrest [9, 1, 5; 17, N 4].
  1920 The representative of Georgia in Yerevan also participated in the Armenian-Georgian correspondence regarding the ownership of the neutral zone of Lori in December 2010.
  Thus, on December 21, in a letter addressed to the Georgian mission, the Secretary of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the USSR M. On the instruction of the People's Committee, Khojamiryan conveyed A. addressed to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Georgia. Bekzadyan 1920 The December 18 application on the issue of belonging to the Lori Neutral Zone [10, 3-4 rounds].
 The Georgian representations in Yerevan and Gharakilisa functioned until 1921. February (Sovietization of Georgia).
 1920 In the fall of 1918, the Plenipotentiary Representation of Soviet Russia operated in Yerevan under the leadership of Boris Legrand.
 A few days after the sovietization of the republic, in 1920. On December 6, 1945, in a telegram addressed to Georgy Chicherin, People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the USSR, and Grigory Orjo, Member of the Caucasus Revolutionary Bureau of the Central Committee of the RSKSR and the Caucasus Front, the Military Revolutionary Council addressed to Nikidze. Legrand was of the opinion that there was no need to maintain the mission of Soviet Russia in Yerevan after the final formation of the Revolutionary Committee of Armenia [18, p. 37].
  Already in 1921 in April B. Legrand was appointed Plenipotentiary Representative of Soviet Russia in Azerbaijan, Armenia and Georgia (based in Tbilissi (Georgia)).
  The latter often interfered in the conduct of internal and foreign relations of the Transcaucasian republics, demanded to be sent copies of documents prepared by the People's Committees and Foreign Affairs Committees on foreign policy, etc. [23, p. 253].
  Naturally, such demands were subject to unequivocal fulfillment.
 Compared to the representations of Georgia and Russia, the Persian consulate in Yerevan was operating longer.
  It was founded in 1913, during the tsarist regime, it also operated in the Republic of Armenia, and after the sovietization of the republic it continued its activity.
 The authorities of Soviet Armenia had a particularly positive attitude towards the Persian consulate.
  One of the best proofs of the said is 1921. The agreement reached between the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Armenian SSR in January 1945 and the Persian Consulate in Yerevan stated that "the presence of a representative of the Persian Consulate is necessary in order to search the houses of Persian citizens."
  The Foreign Affairs Committee on the agreement reached in 1921. On January 27, he informed the General Department of the Police of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs [11, 85].
  This circumstance was conditioned by the willingness of the Persian consul to provide assistance to Armenia.
 The establishment of trade and economic relations with Persia was especially important for Soviet Armenia.
  For that purpose, the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Armenian SSR held talks with the Persian consul in Yerevan Asadullah Khan.
  Negotiations were interrupted in 1921. February 342 HISTORY on the 18th as a result of the change of power in Yerevan and the surrounding area and resumed only in April.
  Responding to the April 13 proposal of the Deputy Foreign Minister of the Armenian SSR Askanaz Mravyan to support Soviet Armenia in a difficult socio-economic situation with food, Asadullah Khan left for Persia.
  He successfully fulfilled the mission offered to him. Necessary food was sent from Atrpatakan to Armenia [20, p. 113-115; 22, pp. 110-113].
 1921 As of October 5, 2006, the Persian Consulate had the following positions: Consul, Secretary (also Deputy Consul), clerk, special duty officer, passport manager, typist, two farash, two guards, janitor (11 posts in total), Deputy Consul Abdul was the khan [6, 173-174].
  Already in 1922 On January 25, the consulate had 8 employees: Deputy Consul (Abdulfet Khan), Acting Secretary and Typist (Lusik Ohanyan), Consulate Officers (Karapet Torgomyan, Safar Ali Sultanzadeh), Farashner (Mashadi Mahmud, Mashad Mahmoud O ), guard (Sadih Hasan oghli of Mashad), disperser (Garnik Amedetsyan).
  All the employees were Persian subjects [14, 34-35].
 The controversy between the Soviet Armenian authorities and the Persian consulate was due to the fact that the consulate sometimes issued passports of Persian citizenship to Western Armenians (in some cases, also to Eastern Armenians) [21, p. 405].
  In order to settle this issue, an interdepartmental commission was set up to check the passports of Persian citizens, headed by Karapet Safaryan, the plenipotentiary of the People's Committee for Foreign Affairs.
  The activities of the commission were controlled and regulated by the People's Committee on Foreign Affairs.
  1922 On February 3, K. In the letter addressed to Safaryan, the secretary of the People's Committee M. Khojamiryan informed that the commission is not authorized to distribute new passports, but only has to check the authenticity of the existing passports, to which K. 343 HISTORY Safaryan answered. "With such an order, we should indirectly give the consul the right to issue a passport at his own discretion, which should be completely contradictory to my proposal, which was already accepted with great difficulty, by which the right to issue a new passport passed to the commission, where the issue will be examined in my presence. Relevant passports will be issued to be presented to the consul ”[14, p. 20-22].
  It is clear that the mentioned order could not be unequivocally acceptable for the Persian consulate.
  In this regard, the consulate expressed dissatisfaction with the People's Committee of Foreign Affairs of the USSR [14, 32 and around].
  Nevertheless, in time the issue was settled.
 The Persian consulate continued its activity in 1922. After the annexation of Soviet Armenia to the Transcaucasian Federation in March and the USSR in December.
 Unlike the Persian consulate, the attitude of the authorities towards the Turkish representations in Soviet Armenia was more cautious.
 The Turkish representation in Yerevan was founded in 1920. in November, after a ceasefire was established in the Turkish-Armenian war.
  In a telegram sent to Yerevan on December 3, the commander of the Turkish Eastern Front, Kyazim Karabekir Pasha, informed: "Captain Bahetin (Behaeddin - H. S.) was appointed as a liaison officer (General Officer of the Eastern Army) in Yerevan to pursue several points of the Turkish-Armenian treaty" [4, p. 1; 5, թ. 87].
  In fact, he would follow the implementation of the provisions of the Treaty of Alexandropol (December 2/3, 1920), which had no legal force at the time of signing.
 As we can see, Behaeddin was appointed liaison officer.
  However, he reserved the rights of a diplomatic representative.
  The People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs of the USSR began to clarify this issue.
  1921 In a letter addressed to Behaeddin on January 3, A. Bekzadyan 344 HISTORY raised the issue of his powers.
  Stressing that, apart from its mandate to monitor the implementation of certain provisions of the agreement with the former (Armenian) government in Alexandropol, the new Soviet government of Armenia is not aware of any other powers or functions of Behaeddin, the State Committee demanded information on the nature and scope of its mission. , թ. 22 and around].
  Based on the request of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Armenian SSR, Behaeddin presented the 1921 January 25 The mandate given by Karabekir, according to which, before the arrival of the Plenipotentiary Representative of the Government of the Turkish Grand National Assembly, Behaeddin was appointed representative of the General Command of the Eastern Front in the USSR [1, 3-4].
  Later, the official nature of the Turkish representation expanded.
  In the documents it was called: "Representation of the Turkish Grand National Assembly in Armenia".
 The Turkish representation in Yerevan and personally Behaeddin were particularly active in 1921. In the days following the victory of the February anti-Soviet uprising.
  Behaeddin was one of the first to congratulate the government of the Committee for the Salvation of the Homeland.
  And in 1921 In his address to him on March 18, 1945, the Chairman of the Salvation Committee, Simon Vratsyan, referring to the Treaty of Alexandropol, asked for the return of Armenian prisoners of war from Turkish captivity, the provision of weapons and ammunition, and military assistance [19, pp. 505-506].
  Because of these and other appeals to the Kemalists, Vratsyan was rightly severely criticized by contemporaries and professional historians.
 Behaeddin addressed the Armenian protesters gathered in front of his apartment on March 22 with the following words. "I am very moved by your warm expressions.
  We, the peoples of the East, have been in constant wars with each other, which have always been used by foreigners.
  I hope that from now on, becoming friends, we will live in peace and be useful to each other. ”[16, N 345 ​​HISTORY These actions of the Turkish representative were not ignored by the USSR authorities.
  After the defeat of the February uprising (April 1921), he was declared a "Persona non grata".
  With the justification of interfering in the internal affairs of the country, actively cooperating with the leaders of the anti-Soviet uprising, the Revolutionary Committee of Armenia in 1921 On May 12, 1945, on the same day, the Central Committee of the NGO (b) K demanded that the Turkish authorities recall Behaeddin from Yerevan [23, p. 61].
  Probably, the leaders of Armenia made a request on this issue to the Plenipotentiary Representative of Soviet Russia in the Transcaucasian Soviet Republics B. Legrand, in response to which on May 17 the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Armenian SSR A. In the telegram addressed to Mravyan, the latter informed. "Your decision regarding Behaeddin is completely correct" [12, p. 43].
  It is interesting that Behaeddin, who was here during the days of the Kars Conference (September 26 - October 13, 1921), sent an extensive letter on September 27 to the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Armenian SSR A. Mravyan.
  The letter writer greeted the Foreign Affairs Committee of the USSR, which had arrived in Kars "for the realization of the ideal of the union of two peoples" and noted: "You wanted to disgrace me before my revolutionary nation, and I will prove to history that I am a loyal revolutionary.
  ... Time and events will prove to you that you are confused and wrong. ”
  On the letter A. Mravyan signed. "Leave without answer" [2, p. 26-27].
 Omar Lutfi Bey, who replaced Behaeddin, and in 1922. Muhiddin Bey, who succeeded him in February, did not shine with legal actions either.
  The Turkish representatives tried to act as defenders of the Turkish citizens living in Soviet Armenia, striving to take under their jurisdiction the settlement of issues related to all Muslims living in the republic.
  The People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs of the Armenian SSR was trying to oppose the mentioned Pan-Turkic practice with its actions.
 346 HISTORY The employees of the Turkish representation in Yerevan were also involved in smuggling weapons from Armenia to Turkey.
  Thus, in 1922. According to the information prepared by the Extraordinary Commission of the Armenian SSR on March 22, 1945, the employees of the Turkish representation in Yerevan were leaving for Igdir "armed to the teeth" and returning unarmed from there.
  The weapons were bought by the representation.
  According to the Emergency Committee, the former representative Omar Lutfi Bey personally led the purchase of weapons, collecting various espionage information about the internal situation in Soviet Armenia and in particular the city of Yerevan.
  The report stated that these data were obtained from persons who inspire complete confidence [3, p. 4].
 1922 According to the list of permanent employees and askers of the Turkish representation in Yerevan submitted to the People's Committee of Foreign Affairs of the USSR on February 27, it had the following positions: representative, secretary general, his deputy, translator, driver, driver's assistant, a guard consisting of 5 people.
  Apart from the Armenian and USSR translators, the other employees of the representation, who were also Turkish citizens, were armed [13, 126-127].
 The Turkish representation in Yerevan continued to operate even after Soviet Armenia became a part of the Transcaucasian Federation and the USSR.
  1923 it was reorganized into a consulate.
 After the evacuation of Alexandropol by the Turkish troops, the command of the Turkish Eastern Front appointed Captain Tefik as its representative.
  1921 April 20, K. The mandate given to him by Karabekir stated that he was "appointed as a representative in the Turkish [each] command and in the command of the 11th Red Army and before the command of the Red Army in Alexandropol" [8, p. 53].
 The local authorities of Alexandropol were convinced that Tefik was mostly engaged in espionage.
  Thus, in 1921 On May 26, the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Armenian SSR A. In a letter addressed to Mravyan, the head of the internal affairs department of the Alexandropol Revolutionary Committee H. Amatuni mentioned that Tefik had avoided presenting the mandate given to him for a long time, as well as continued to live in the train station (in case he had an apartment in the city).
  H. Amatuni reported that the number of Turkish Assyrians was much higher than the 12 mandated, and that about 120 Turkish Assyrians wandering in Alexandropol and calling themselves supporters of the Soviet regime were in fact members of the Tefik spy group. 46 et seq.].
 Representation in 1922 turned into a consulate.
  The Turkish consulate in Alexandropol claimed to use a code telegram, to which it had no right as a consulate.
  That is why the request of the consulate to use passwords was not approved by the People's Committee of Foreign Affairs of the USSR.
  The Foreign Affairs Committee also informed the Turkish representation in Yerevan about this [21, p. 402].
 1922 In the fall of 1918, the Turkish consulate in Alexandropol, headed by Hakki Bey, had eight employees. 98].
  It also continued to operate in the following years.
 1922 After the dissolution of the People's Committee of Foreign Affairs of Soviet Armenia in July 1945, the People's Council of the USSR and the People's Committee of Internal Affairs maintained relations with the Persian Consulate in Yerevan, the Turkish diplomatic mission and the Consulate in Alexandropol.
 In conclusion, shortly after the sovietization of Armenia, the Georgian and Russian diplomatic missions were closed, and the Persian and Turkish missions in Yerevan continued their work.
  1921 A Turkish consulate was also established in Alexandropol in April 1945.
  The People's Council of the Armenian SSR had relations with the latter through the People's Committee on Foreign Affairs.
  The latter was trying to regulate the relations with foreign representations 348 HISTORY.
  The Persian consulate was friendly to Armenia, and the Turkish representations were mostly engaged in espionage activities, or tried to present themselves as representing the interests of Muslims living in Soviet Armenia.
 .
