The social market economy (German: soziale Marktwirtschaft), also known as the Rhine Capitalism or Social Capitalism [19], is a socio-economic model with only 230 RULES governing the free market capitalist economic system with social policy, which establishes fair competition with the market. state [15, page 2].
  The roots of the concept of social market economy go back to Germany, in particular, the best indicators of the German economy of Ludwig Erhard.
  This economic model, applied in 1948 by the Federal Republic of Germany, is a synthesis of some economic analyzes made in 1930 and the political will of the founding fathers.
  In general, it should be noted that the social market economy is not the third type of road, without borders between capitalism and collectivist communism, but aims to combine a competitive economy, private initiatives and social progress.
  Some authors use the term "social capitalism" in much the same sense as "social market economy" [7, p. 18] [13, pp. 19-20].
  It is also called "Ryan Capitalism", which is usually contrasted with the Anglo-Saxon model of capitalism [12, p. 199].
  The term "social" was coined by Adenauer to prevent further references to Christian socialism [8, pp. 53-54].
  The social market economy opposes non-intervention policies and socialist economic systems [14, p. 185] and combines private enterprise with state intervention to establish fair competition.
  Nevertheless, it maintains a balance between high economic growth, low inflation, low unemployment, favorable working conditions, social welfare and public services.
  First of all, the principle of Rapke's theory is that the concentration of power, power has a negative impact on the market economy, as well as the social sphere, so social policy can not be separated from economic policy.
  Therefore, the main goal of the social market economy is the dismantling of labor (de-proletarization), the general development of welfare, the merging of property and solidarity (Müller-Armack, 1972) [10, pp. 99-108].
  The social market economy is also based on Walter Euken's concept, according to which the role of the state is to create a practical legal basis for effective economic management, for effective economic management, limiting the possibilities of political interference in the economic process.
  In his work, Wrobel (2012) considers the social market economy as a socio-economic model, which synthesizes the system of a free market capitalist economy with the system of social welfare.
  An important feature of the social market economy is the cornerstone of the institutional economic order.
  In general, looking at economic policy, this should not only be consistent over time, but also sustainable so that private decision-makers can build reliable expectations [3, p. 10].
  This principle also requires that no more resources be used than is absolutely necessary to meet that need.
  In other words, limited resources should not be wasted for maximum overall economic benefit (պաշտպան resource protection) [5, p. 407].
  The scope of a social market economy includes six component principles that aim to create a labor-friendly pricing system within a competitive economy [14, p. 348] The Principle Component Analysis (PCA) technique is used to measure the social market economy, comparison.
  The "Modern Social Market Economy Index" (MSME Index) defines and measures the characteristics of the modern social market economy through international comparison [2, p. 6].
  In contrast to other measures of economic performance, the Social Market Economy Index (MSME) is an institutional approach that outlines the measurable performance of the 232 GOVERNMENT institutes, which under the Lisbon Treaty [16] allows for high competitive social market economies.
  According to the above-mentioned agreement, the countries of the European Union should attach great importance to the application of the social market economy, which ensures the balance of economic freedom and social welfare.
  Among other notions, the indicator could lead the EU to a "highly competitive social market economy", which it defines in the Lisbon Treaty as the preferred economic order [1, p. 228].
  According to the Lisbon Treaty, the social market economy is a model of sustainable social development.
  Empirical results of the application of this technique have shown that the decisive factors in defining a social market economy at European level are the effective distribution of the market, especially open markets, freedom of contract, financial stability, social inclusion and environmental protection.
 In order to measure a social market economy, it is necessary to measure the indicators of the above-mentioned principal components, the details of which are presented below.
 Table 1. Efficient and Competitive Market Distribution Principle Open Markets Efficient Pricing System Indicator Capital Movement Control Freedom of Migration Market Restrictions Product Market Control Price Control against Market Prices Subsidiary Principle 2. Subsidiary Competition Property Rights Contract Law Liability Indicator Investor Protection Patent Protection Intellectual Property Selection Job Transparency and Consumer Protection Judicial Review Private Insolvency Ratio of Medium Entrepreneurs to Total Entrepreneurs Manager Responsibility Table 3.Economic and Environmental Stability Principle Financial Stability Consistency of Economic Policy Indicator Independence from International Banks Depth of Credit Information Index Coverage of the Public and Private Credit Registry Principle of Failure to Prevent the Correlation between Banking Capital and Asset Ratio. Readiness Level Pension Systems 234 MANAGEMENT Environmental Protection Effectiveness Social Security Expenditures Research and Progress Expenditures Market Economy Instruments Environmental Policy (Sustainable Government Indicators) Revenue from Green Taxes Table 4.Social inclusion Principle Effective labor market Social mobility Indicator Active labor market policy for each unemployed Employment protection legislation Repeal prevention Employee-employee equality Effective labor market programs Sustainable social inclusion rates Discrimination exclusion (state-funded early childhood education) Education Structures Compulsory Unemployment Insurance Guaranteed Minimum Social Security Income Tax and Incentives to Work And Figure 1 below shows the results of 235 MANAGEMENT indicators of the social market economy of the European Union countries based on the study of the components of the above tables.Effective labor market Social mobility Indicator Active labor market policy for the unemployed Employment protection legislation Repeal prevention Employee-employee equality Effective labor market programs Sustainable social inclusion Discrimination indicators (sustainable state indicators) Public expenditures Child care and education Compulsory Unemployment Insurance Guaranteed Minimum Social Security Income Tax and Incentives to Work And Figure 1 below shows the results of the 235 GOVERNMENT social market economy indicators in the European Union based on a study of the components of the above tables.Effective labor market Social mobility Indicator Active labor market policy for the unemployed Employment protection legislation Repeal prevention Employee-employee equality Effective labor market programs Sustainable social inclusion Discrimination indicators (sustainable state indicators) Public expenditures Child care and education Compulsory Unemployment Insurance Guaranteed Minimum Social Protection Income Tax and Incentives to Work And Figure 1 below shows the results of the 235 GOVERNMENT social market economy indicators in the European Union based on a study of the components of the above tables.Mobility Indicator Active Labor Market Policy for the Unemployed Employment Protection Legislation Coverage Prevention Employee-Employee Equality Effective Labor Market Programs Sustainable Social Inclusion Non-Discrimination Indicators (Sustainable State Indicators) Public Expenditure on Child Care and Early Childhood Education Guaranteed minimum social protection Income tax and incentives to work And Figure 1 below shows the results of the 235 MANAGEMENT indicators of the social market economy of the European Union countries, based on the study of the indicators of the components of the above tables.Mobility Indicator Active Labor Market Policy for the Unemployed Employment Protection Legislation Coverage Prevention Employee-Employee Equality Effective Labor Market Programs Sustainable Social Inclusion Non-Discrimination Indicators (Sustainable State Indicators) Public Expenditure on Child Care and Early Childhood Education Guaranteed minimum social protection Income tax and incentives to work And Figure 1 below shows the results of the 235 MANAGEMENT indicators of the social market economy of the European Union countries, based on the study of the indicators of the components of the above tables.Policy for the Unemployed Employment Protection Legislation Prevention of Coverage Employee-Equal Equality Effective Labor Market Programs Sustainable Social Inclusion Indicators Discrimination (Sustainable State Indicators) Public Expenditure on Child Care and Early Education Educational Structures Compulsory Unemployment Insurance Guaranteed Minimum Social Security Income The results of the 235 MANAGEMENT indicators of the social market economy of the European Union countries are shown in Figure 1 below, based on the study of the indicators of the components of the above tables.Policy for the Unemployed Employment Protection Legislation Prevention of Coverage Employer-Employee Equality Effective Labor Market Programs Sustainable Social Inclusion Indicators Discrimination (Sustainable State Indicators) Public Expenditures on Child Care and Early Education Educational Structures Compulsory Unemployment Insurance Guaranteed Minimum Social Security Income The results of the 235 MANAGEMENT indicators of the social market economy of the European Union countries are based on the study of the indicators of the components of the above-mentioned tables.Effective Labor Market Programs Sustainable State Indicators of Inclusion Discrimination (Sustainable State Indicators) Public Expenditure on Child Care and Early Education Educational Structures Compulsory Unemployment Insurance Guaranteed Minimum Social Security Income Tax and Employment Incentives And Figure 1 below shows the countries of the European Union The results of the indicators of market economy 235 MANAGEMENT based on the study of the indicators of the components of the above tables.Effective Labor Market Programs Sustainable State Indicators of Inclusion Discrimination (Sustainable State Indicators) Public Expenditure on Child Care and Early Education Educational Structures Compulsory Unemployment Insurance Guaranteed Minimum Social Security Income Tax and Employment Incentives And Figure 1 below shows the countries of the European Union The results of the indicators of market economy 235 MANAGEMENT based on the study of the indicators of the components of the above-mentioned tables.protection Income tax and incentives to work And Figure 1 below shows the results of the 235 MANAGEMENT indicators of the social market economy of the European Union countries, based on the study of the indicators of the components of the above tables.protection Income tax and incentives to work And Figure 1 below shows the results of the 235 MANAGEMENT indicators of the social market economy of the European Union countries, based on the study of the indicators of the components of the above tables.
 Figure 1. Distribution of EU Member States by Social Market Economy Indicators (2013) [1, p. 236] Thus, in the countries of the European Union in 2013. A large-scale survey was conducted according to the above indicators, where 0 is the lowest and 100 is the highest.
  It was noteworthy that almost half of the countries had an average index of social market economy (51.78) (see Figure 1).
  The countries with the highest level of social market economy were Sweden, Finland, Denmark, Estonia and Germany.
 It is important to note that countries with a low level of social market economy have a value of 0 ÷ 40, the average level was in the 40-70 range, and the high level of a social market economy was between 70 and 100.
  In this respect, it can be distinguished (see Figure 1). 236 GOVERNANCE  11 countries have a low level of market economy, with Romania and Hungary occupying the last positions, and France and Portugal occupying the best positions in this group.  8 countries have a medium level of social market economy, including Austria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Slovenia, Belgium, Latvia, Luxembourg and Lithuania.
 ։ There are 9 countries with a high level of social market economy, including the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Poland, Ireland, Germany, Estonia, Denmark, Finland and Sweden.
 .
