It is no secret that one of the most important obstacles to the economic development of any state is the existence of a shadow economy.
  Speaking about the shadow economy, every person who has more or less an idea about the economy first of all focuses his attention on the tax policy of the state.
  This is not accidental and is conditioned by the direct connection between taxes and GDP, to which the famous economist Lafer once referred.
  The latter claimed that the constant increase of the tax burden in the economy would eventually lead to either the reduction of the economy or the emergence of a shadow economy.
  This is a fact that should be taken into account by any state in the implementation of economic policy.
 The existence of the shadow economy is an important issue for any state, and the search for effective ways to reduce it is conditioned by the urgency and urgency of the issue.
 When considering the existence of the shadow economy in the economy as the most important obstacle and problem, economic issues such as assessing the scale of the shadow economy and identifying the causes of the shadow economy appear in the center of priority for each country.
  In other words, in order to get a complete picture of the problem and look for effective solutions, first of all it is necessary to have an objective idea of ​​the scale of the problem and the reasons for its occurrence.
  In this context, it can be argued that only by identifying the causes of the shadow economy can the state develop a system of measures that will exclude the basis for the existence of the shadow economy and contribute to its reduction in scale.
 And although estimating the scale of the shadow economy is a complex process, and the results obtained from the evaluation may not accurately reflect the true size of the shadow, a number of international organizations have developed a set of methods to estimate the scale of the shadow economy in different countries.
  The picture is different in terms of the reasons for the emergence of the shadow economy.
  In other words, if from some point of view it is possible to find generalized mechanisms and methods for assessing the shadow economy, which will be applicable to almost all countries, then the causes of the shadow economy are different and depend on the national characteristics of the country.
  That is why the shadow economy has 163 GOVERNMENT In addition to assessing the scale of the shadow economy, it is important for each country to identify the causes of the shadow economy.
 According to a document published by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in January 2018, the average shadow economy in the Republic of Armenia in 1991-2015 was estimated at 42.6%.
  Especially noteworthy is the fact that in the 25-year period from 1991 to 2015, the assessment of the shadow economy underwent minor changes, fluctuating around the average.
  This proves that since independence, almost half of Armenia's economy has been in the shadows, and tax policy tools have been ineffective as they have not helped reduce the shadow economy.
  Moreover, such a high index of the shadow economy gives grounds to believe that from the point of view of tax policy, the functions of the authorized body, the tax body, have not been evaluated fairly and objectively, the reasons for inefficiency of those functions have not been revealed.
  As a result, the inefficient assessment of the functions of the tax body did not allow to identify and assess the reasons for the emergence of the shadow economy.
 In other words, the assessment of the functions of the tax body was ineffective, as not all the reasons were found, in the presence of which people willy-nilly appeared in the shadows, hid their economic activity indicators, and so on.
  That is why, from this point of view, it can be argued that the shadow economy is the result of inefficient assessment of the functions of the tax authority.
 When talking about the assessment of the functions of the tax authority in the Republic of Armenia, there is a need to analyze the functions performed by the tax authority of the Republic of Armenia, to identify the negative consequences arising from their implementation, which are the reason for the emergence of shadow economy and consequently shadow economy.
  That is why we should try to discuss a number of functions of the tax body, the implementation of which, as a result of inadequate and inefficient assessment, risks of shadow economy appear.
 The functions of the tax body in the Republic of Armenia, the State Revenue Committee of the Republic of Armenia (SRC), are defined by the charter of the SRC of the Republic of Armenia, which is approved by the Government of the Republic of Armenia [8].
 In particular, the goals, tasks and functions of the RA State Revenue Committee are defined by the RA SRC charter.
  And although the above-mentioned charter of the RA State Revenue Committee defines many functions, nevertheless, let's try to analyze a number of functions, the implementation of which is directly related to the reasons for the emergence of the shadow economy.
  In particular, three similar functions can be distinguished from the list of functions of the RA State Revenue Committee. Կազմակերպ Organizing the collection of state taxes and fees, as well as the accounting of revenues controlled by the tax authority.
 Իրականաց Exercising control over taxpayers in accordance with the law.
 ։ Public awareness on legal acts regulating tax and customs relations.
 The implementation of the function of organizing the collection of state taxes and fees is directly connected with the mission of the RA State Revenue Committee [9].
  In particular, the implementation of this function aims to promote the implementation of the mission of securing the RA state budget revenues.
  In other words, it is clear that, considering the mission of securing the state budget revenues as a priority, the tax body, in order to carry out the function of tax collection, has to involuntarily have to use methods and mechanisms aimed at securing those revenues.
  Moreover, in order to find out to what extent the mission of the RA State Revenue Committee has been carried out in its 165 GOVERNMENTS and to what extent the tax collection works have been properly organized and who have failed in their work, one of the assessment criteria of the tax body must determine the tax collection index.
  An indicator that will show to what extent each of the tax officers engaged in this function has ensured the proportional collection of state revenues assigned to him.
  In this context, it is obvious that the work of the tax officer performing the function of organizing tax collection should be entirely aimed at securing tax revenues "at all costs".
  This is most visible when an attempt is made to view the implementation of the function against the background of reductions in the state apparatus.
  In particular, since the reduction of the state apparatus is often based on the extent to which the tax officer has performed the functions assigned to him, the tax officer performing the tax collection function has no choice but to ensure the collection of tax revenues "at all costs".
  At first glance, such an effective implementation of the tax collection system has a negative impact on the shadow economy.
  In other words, the tax revenue-oriented function initially ignores the shadow economy factor.
  From the point of view of the function of organizing tax collection, it is important to collect them and not to increase them as a result of reducing the shadow economy.
  Evidence of such a function is 42.6% of the shadow economy and for almost 30% of the state budget revenues, the index of tax overpayments published in various sources.
 The magnitude of these indicators suggests that the provision of tax revenues as a mission was carried out at the expense of overpayments, and the problems of reducing the shadow economy were pushed to the background.
 166 MANAGEMENT The function of exercising control over taxpayers in the manner prescribed by law presupposes the implementation of tax inspections, as a result of which fines are imposed.
  In order to evaluate the effectiveness of this function, it is necessary to find out the connection between the results of the inspection and the reduction of the shadow economy.
  For this purpose, let us try to analyze the reports on tax inspections published by the RA State Revenue Committee [10].
  According to those reports, the SRC tax body carries out 7000-10000 inspections annually, almost 70-73% of which are inspections of the accuracy of the use of cash registers1.
 In particular, according to the report on inspections and studies carried out by the SRC tax body during 2018, 7608 out of 10,615 inspections are inspections of the accuracy of the use of cash registers, which make up 71.6% of the total inspections.
  It is also noteworthy that, taking into account the amount of the fine set by the RA Tax Code for inspections of the use of cash registers, it becomes clear that the total fine imposed as a result of inspections of cash registers, which is 70% of the total inspections, can not exceed 2 billion drams. , which is about 0.1% of the state budget revenues.
  Comparing these indicators, it is clear that the vast majority of tax audits are not intended to facilitate the collection of tax revenues, as they constitute a very small part of tax revenues.
  But to what extent does it contribute to the reduction of the shadow economy?
  From this point of view, the combination of reports on (completed) inspections and investigations carried out by the RA State Revenue Committee reveals that the separation of tax inspections, especially the use of cash registers, was based on the inspection grounds and the articles on violated legal acts.
 167 MANAGEMENT Accuracy checks, about 40-50% have been carried out by the same business entities during different years.
 It seems that about 5-10% of taxpayers registered in Armenia are always in the shadows and do not change their behavior after a one-time inspection, but continue to operate in the shadows, as half of the inspections are carried out by them over the years.
  This is in the case when the assessment of international organizations on the shadow economy is about 42.6%.
  In this context, it can be assumed that the tax control function is not aimed at reducing the shadow economy at all, but aims only at its implementation as a function.
  The picture becomes even clearer when the assessment of the work of the tax officer performing the control function is chosen to carry out inspections and as a result violations are detected.
  In other words, it is quite clear that in order to evaluate the work of a tax officer performing a supervisory function, the tax authority willy-nilly has to determine the number of inspections carried out and, as a result, the detection of violations.
  From this point of view, the employee performing the control function has no choice but to ignore the factor of the shadow economy and "engage in the task of ensuring the index of inspections at all costs."
 The function of public awareness on legal acts regulating tax and customs relations assumes the prevention of cases of violation of legal acts by taxpayers.
  It is assumed that through this function, the tax and customs authorities should inform and warn taxpayers about violations as much as possible, preventing and deterring them from committing violations.
  Too often, prevention and awareness-raising measures can be more effective than imposing fines for violations.
  However, in reality, some of the provisions in the RA Tax Code are not only unclear, but also not known to many citizens.
  In particular, in case of alienation of two or more properties by a citizen within a year, the legal provision of paying taxes before the transaction is unknown is unknown to many citizens.
  Moreover, very often there are citizens in this field of taxation who have carried out alienation transactions out of need.
 That is why in some cases taxpayers, due to the heavy tax burden on the one hand, and the low level of awareness on the other, are forced to find themselves in the shadows, and when they find out about the tax, they are surprised and try to hide the real turnover.
  Behavior of taxpayers in the shadows is also manifested when starting a new business.
  On the one hand, the ignorance related to the state registration of the taxpayer, and the complexity of the documents related to the taxpayer registration, on the other hand, the uncertainty about the new business and the lack of privileges for the new business, by law, force many taxpayers to be in the shadows.
 In general, although there are many reasons for the existence of the shadow economy, in Armenia they are largely the result of inefficient assessment of the functions of the tax authority.
 .
