There are many ways of competition and organization strategy: production, product, price, etc.
  But any strategy is (or should be) based on competitive advantage.
  Therefore, strategic management can be defined as a process of managing competitive advantage.
 By saying a competitive advantage, one can understand the position of the organization in the market, which enables it to overcome the competitive forces and attract buyers on its side.
 Competitive advantage allows an organization to ensure above-average profitability over other organizations in the industry or in a given market segment (which ensures more efficient use of resources) and to gain a firm foothold in the market.
 It is known that the competitive advantage of the organization in the branch is also determined by the size of the target market.
 Therefore, before choosing the overall strategy of the organization, it is necessary to determine a number of limiting factors  1 . 1. the list of products that he has to produce, in addition to the type of potential buyers, 2. the intended routes of distribution of the product, 3. the place where he has to sell the product and a number of related industries with which he intends to compete.
 Practical management (Training manual).
  H.1, V. H. Arakelyan, L. H. Simonyan, A. Ս. Tadevosyan, A. Գ. Shahoyan, Yerevan, "Engineer" 2003.
 102 ECONOMICS In this case, the organization can choose the mass market or market niche.
 By combining target markets with core strategies, organizations are expanding their strategy choices.
  When cost reduction and product stratification strategies are targeted at the mass market, they are referred to as cost priority and product stratification, respectively.
  When these strategies are aimed at market niches, they are called focused.
  The choice of a specific competitive strategy essentially depends on both the strategic strength of the organization and the possibilities of expanding resources.
  Therefore, the implementation of the strategy chosen by the organization in many cases is determined by its internal environment.
 The cost advantage strategy is oriented to serve the whole market with standardized products, the lamination strategy, unlike the previous one, is aimed at producing a special product, which is a transformation of a standard product.
  Such products are intended for consumers who are not satisfied with the standard product and they are willing to pay for the uniqueness of the product.
 Product stratification (or in other words, product isolation in the market) is the ability of an organization to provide a unique and higher value (compared to competitors) product (in terms of quality) to buyers in terms of its delivery methods, special after-sales service characteristics.
  It presupposes a clear, understandable consumer demand and prefers the fulfillment of obligations to the buyers, the knowledge of the possibilities of one's own organization, the implementation of constant innovations.
 The potential factors for product stratification are the following factors: the increase in the value of the product for the buyer 103 ECONOMICS, their psychological satisfaction.
  During the stratification of the product, its cost increases, but in that case the costs are of secondary importance, as they are usually compensated by setting high prices.
  That is why the stratification of the product gives an opportunity to deviate from the price competition, to "disperse" different market segments with the competitors.
  Therefore, the lamination strategy creates an opportunity to bring a variety of products to the market, offering buyers high quality, special products, produced through the use of high technologies, providing customers with superior service, etc.
  However, not all products can be layered, ie adapted to the needs of a certain group of consumers.
  Examples include versatile, standardized products such as oil, gas, wires, and more.
 The main stages of the product lamination process are shown in Figure 1  2 .
 They show that in order to successfully implement this strategy, the organization must carefully study the needs and behavior of consumers in order to understand what they consider important and valuable and what they are willing to pay for.
  Then, taking into account the results obtained, the organization adds one or more distinctive characteristics to its products.
  Competitive advantage arises when the buyer prefers the product characteristics with which the organization launches the product.
 Practical management (Training manual).
  H.1, V. H. Arakelyan, L. H. Simonyan, A. Ս. Tadevosyan, A. Գ. Shahoyan, Yerevan, "Engineer" 2003.
 104 ECONOMICS Figure 1. Possibility of product stratification Stratification can be unsuccessful if the price is increased. which the buyer is willing to pay does not reimburse the additional costs associated with providing the distinctive features of the product.
 The concepts of product stratification, staff stratification, service and image stratification are usually distinguished.
  Product stratification implies offering a product with new specifications, with better design than competitors.
  Wide stratification of products (cars, home appliances) is a consequence of market policy and a common phenomenon.
  The basis for product stratification is the product list of the organization, which presents similar or technologically closely related products.
  In the case of product stratification, an organization may propose a limited list (for example, a BMW car), a simple 105 ECONOMICS, in which case it refers to a focus stratification strategy or a wide range of products.
 International competition is an imperative requirement for the enterprises of the republic to implement a product stratification strategy.
 Studies show that light industry organizations have succeeded in this area.
  The service layering strategy assumes the provision of different and higher (compared to competitors) level of services alongside the goods sold (delivery, equipment placement, after-sales service speed and reliability, customer training and consulting).
  It should be noted that such a strategy has become widespread in commercial organizations of the country.
 Staff recruitment strategy involves staff recruitment and training, they perform their job functions with customers more efficiently than competitor staff.
  Staff stratification strategy is effective when used in conjunction with service stratification strategy in the service sector.
 Image layering strategy involves creating an image of an organization or product that differs from its competitors in the best way.
  Thus, many well-known cigarette brands have a taste quality, one assortment of Marlboro has captured about 30% of the global tobacco market due to its image, using the image layering strategy.
  The firm can produce different products for different market segments.
 It should be noted that the image layering strategy has been widely used in a number of sectors of the republic's economy.
  Thus, in the field of tobacco production, "Grand Tobacco" and "Masis Tobacco" produce different assortments of cigarettes due to growing demands.
 106 ECONOMICS Depending on the specifics of the product and the organization, it is possible to implement several layers at the same time.
  The main thing is not to ensure the uniqueness of the product, but it must be accepted by buyers who pay the cost of lamination.
  Stratification is the real way in which an organization can make a profit higher than its cross-sectoral profit due to product characteristics, buyers' propensity for the brand, which reduces their price sense, and rising costs can be passed on to buyers.
 Buyers' inclination towards a certain brand is a barrier to entering the industry.
  The products of new firms must provide special characteristics that enable them to win the competition.
 Thus, the possible sources of stratification (uniqueness) of the organization and its products are: Բարձր high quality of the product (product), reliability;  image of the organization, brand, status of the product; անվան list of products to be released;  technical priorities, innovations; shipping methods),  applied technologies (processing accuracy), ողների qualification and experience of employees (especially in the field of banking),  control of activities,  appropriate location (for example, retail stores). Մակարդ Level of vertical integration.
 Sources of uniqueness are diverse and unique to each industry and organization.
  Expenditure can be achieved by defining an efficient way of structuring costs.
  Stratification can be achieved in different ways.
  It can be the reputation of the brand, the full range of services, the full list of products.
 Both cost-cutting strategy and successful stratification provide an opportunity to compete in the industry against other major forces.
  It should be noted that the stratification strategy implies the need to develop units and flexible production, which allows to quickly transform production in accordance with the needs of the changing market, to develop marketing services in the organization, to timely understand the wishes and preferences of buyers.
 Important characteristics are also the reputation of the organization, the level of its product quality, creative atmosphere, the involvement of highly qualified employees for cooperation, etc.
  It is clear that layered products are sold at higher prices.
 On the other hand, in order for buyers to really understand the value of product stratification, certain market signals are needed.
  Therefore, the layering strategy assumes the existence of "know-how" in the field of marketing, which requires large investments in operational marketing.
  This can be intensive advertising, attractive packaging, structural features, the interior of the buildings where the purchase is made by the firm's good reputation, the extensive experience of marketing staff, and so on.
 Studies show that in the country, with the exception of tobacco, light and food products, the stratification strategy has not yet been widely used, especially the stratification of brands.
  Therefore, it is necessary for the leaders of the organizations, based on the experience of firms from leading countries, to develop strategic plans that will enable the implementation of the 108 ECONOMICS strategy, which can ensure maximum profit and achieve the intended goal.
 .
