The beginning of printing in Shushi is conditioned by the 31 activities of the Evangelical Preaching Society in Basel, Switzerland.
  1821 The mentioned Protestant research was carried out in October 2010 with the funding provided by the Science Committee of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Armenia within the framework of a scientific topic with the code 19YR-6A059.
 The Evangelical Preaching Society was founded in 1804. In Basel, which was the center of German Protestantism for many years.
  This company, in partnership with the British Bible Society, also adopted missionary preaching in a non-Christian environment [14, p. 372 HISTORY commissioned by Count Felician Martin von Zaremba and August Heinrich Dietrich , page 2].
  1822 During a reception given to Tsar Alexander I in the winter of 1941, Protestant preachers were allowed to preach the word of God freely among the pagan and Muslim peoples of the Caucasus, and to open schools and printing presses [14, p. 121].
  The general manager of the Caucasus, General Alexei Yermolov, was informed about this.
 The latter instructed the local officials to help the preachers in every possible way to roam freely and safely and explore the borders of Derbent, Baku and Juba, as there was not yet perfect peace due to the new conquest by the Russian troops [5, p. 3].
 The Evangelical Preaching Society instructed the preachers to carry out their activities with the primary aim of spreading the word of God among the local nations, for which the Protestant preachers had to learn the languages ​​of the natives.
  In a convenient location between the Black and Caspian Seas, they had to set up a printing press to print their school textbooks and the Bible in various languages ​​[6, p. 469].
 1822 Basel preachers taught Armenian, Persian, and Turkish to 32 Swedish missionaries for about a year. Traveling through the provinces of Gandzak, Karabakh, Shamakh and Baku [10, p. 403], they preferred to settle in Shushi, reasoning that the city had a huge amount of vacant land for their buildings and vegetable gardens [6, p. 473].
  About this intention F. Zaremba and A. Dietrich in 1823 On November 21, General A. was informed in writing. Yermolov.
  We know from the inscription that still in 1823. Swedish Protestants in September 1802 They settled near the city of Pyatigorsk in the North Caucasus, founding a village called Karras.
  They worked closely with the Basel preachers [4, p. 80].
 373 HISTORY On their way from Tbilissi (Georgia) to Shushi, they received a license from the Ministry of Religious Affairs and People's Enlightenment to establish a college and a printing house [6, p. 473].
 A large plot of land was handed over to the Protestant preachers in Shushi by the local authorities, where the latter planned to build buildings for their needs.
  1824 The branch of the Evangelical Preaching Society was established in Shushi [10, p. 403; 6, p. 472].
  Already in 1825 In January, Protestant preachers opened an Armenian college in Shushi with the participation of 33 German immigrants, and in October the printing house was acquired.
  In fact, the missionary community was formed [14, p. 123].
 1826-1828 The Russo-Persian War disrupted Protestant propaganda.
  1826 In the middle of the 19th century, the Persians tried to reconquer Karabakh, but the Russian garrison was able to resist, and Shushi remained invincible [3, pp. 202-204].
  1826 With the fall of the Russo-Persian War coming to an end, the Protestant preachers resumed their work.
  It should be noted that the latter mentioned in their reports that in case of the capture of Shushi by the Persian army, their propaganda mission would have completely failed [10, p. 384].
 F. Zaremba began his activity with the opening of a small Russian college, where six students would study, one of whom was a Tatar [11, p. 475].
  And some Armenian priests who wanted to read the New Testament in the original language could learn Greek. Near Dietrich.
  Protestant preachers reopened a small Armenian educational institution for six young Armenians.
  These young people later had to be trained as pedagogues to teach in new Armenian colleges [14, p. 124].
 As we have already mentioned, the Protestant preachers learned Armenian, Persian and Turkish from the Swedish missionaries for about a year, and already in Shushi they realized that the word in the region referred to the "Galstakan" Protestants in Wlumberg, South Germany. They settled in Georgia [4, page 80].
 374 HISTORY For the further course of their activity it was even more important to master the dialects of the local languages ​​[10, pp. 391-392].
 The preachers saw the need for this especially when working among the Turkish-Tatar Muslim population (as mentioned in the missionaries' reports).
 1826 Protestant preachers sold some Bibles and the New Testament or distributed them free of charge to Germans, Armenians, and Russians, as these nations were able to read the literature provided by the preachers in a language they could understand [10, p. 392].
  Meanwhile, the spread of Christian literature among the Turkish-Tatar Muslims was not possible because the language of the Turkish books in the possession of the Protestant preachers was incomprehensible to the local Turkish-Tatars because of linguistic differences with the dialect they used.
  At the same time, it should be emphasized that the local Turkish-Tatar Muslims did not know how to read and write in Turkish and Tatar.
 Some of them knew Persian, so they used only Persian literature.
  To solve this problem, Protestant preachers not only translated into dialects understandable to the local Turko-Tatars, but also took steps to move the Persian-language Holy Scriptures from India to Calcutta, intending to distribute them to both Persians and Turko-Tatars in the region [10, p. 393].
  To carry out their plans, they even planned to make a reconnaissance trip to Persia [10, p. 397].
 It is interesting that the Protestant preachers in 1826 In their reports on their activities, they mentioned that little work had been done among the Armenians, although the Armenian people generally loved and believed in them [10, pp. 390-391].
  According to reports, the local Armenian clergy had good relations with the Protestant preachers [10, p. 396].
  The latter in 1826. Only a few Armenian Bibles and the New Testament were able to spread among the Armenian people.
  The preachers explained this fact by the fact that the Armenian Holy Books were printed in 375 HISTORY exclusively in Old Armenian, which was very little known.
  This is how the preachers explained the lack of noticeable demand and scarcity of the Armenian Holy Scriptures [10, p. 393].
 According to the Protestant preachers, the absence of relevant teachers was a serious obstacle to opening a regular school for the Armenians of Shushi.
  The point is that the Armenian youth should have taught the Armenian language to the Armenian teacher.
  Protestant preachers also note that Armenians, as a rule, like to educate their children, especially when the teacher is Armenian.
  In order to solve this problem, one of the preachers, Friedrich Haas, was instructed to bring one of the former Armenian students of the Lazarian Seminary from Moscow, who was to teach at an Armenian college.
 As soon as they arrived, the preachers intended to open a regular school in Shushi, for which favorable conditions were created.
  The Armenian youth studying in the small Armenian educational institution we mentioned would become the pillars of the future regular college [10, pp. 393-394].
 The Protestant preachers already had the experience of opening such a regular school for the Armenian youth in Gandzak, where they allowed a certain Armenian teacher in that city (by their definition, a capable person) to continue the educational process with their help.
  1826 The college had 80 students.
  After learning about the local conditions and needs, the Protestant preachers later planned to open several new branches in other Armenian-populated areas of the region [10, p. 394].
 1826 The Shushi branch of the Protestant preachers received 1,300 Dutch ducats, equivalent to 3,900 Russian silver rubles34.
  The main expenses were intended for the needs of the six Protestant preachers in Shushi and the construction work undertaken by them.
  The annual cost of each publisher was set at 80 Dutch ducats (240 Russian silver rubles).
  However, some of the preachers were able to make the Russian and Dutch coins in common use at that time [9, p. 153].
 376 HISTORY save money 35, as a result of which in 1826. They had saved 100 ducats (300 Russian silver rubles) from the means provided for their activities.
  1826 The publishers spent half of the total amount of the project on construction work (583 Dutch ducats or 1,750 Russian silver rubles).
  In general, in 1826. As a result of their activities, the preachers spent 3602 Russian silver rubles (1200 Dutch ducats) [10, pp. 395-396].
 According to the reports of the Protestant preachers, in 1826 The construction of the Shushi branch was nearing completion.
  The relatively simple buildings they built were comfortable for missionary work and were more than expected by the publishers [10, p. 395].
 1827 In a letter dated June 25, 1945, the Protestant preachers again received permission from the Russian authorities to operate freely, to travel, to preach, and to carry out educational work between the Black and Caspian Seas.
 The propagandists mentioned in their reports that the fact that their activities were re-authorized by the Russian authorities was warmly received by ordinary Armenians, and especially by Armenian priests, who led the Protestant preachers under Catholicos Ephrem I of Dzoragegh (1809-1830).
  The fact that the Protestant preachers had a very high opinion of the Catholicos is interesting.
  The latter, in turn, received the preachers amicably, giving them his blessing.
  The preachers also wanted to meet with the spiritual leader of the Armenians of Georgia, Archbishop Nerses Ashtaraketsi, but they did not succeed.
  Protestant preachers are too high. It should be noted that the Protestant preachers had to take care of their basic needs with a certain amount of money.
  The study shows that in 1831 In Tbilissi (Georgia) 1 liter of oil cost 1-1.5 rubles, 1 kg of cheese - 45-60 silver kopecks, buffalo skin - 4-5 rubles, ox skin - 2.45-3 rubles, a bucket (about 12 liters) wine - 1.2 rubles, a bucket (about 12 liters) alcohol - up to 2 rubles, one bag (16.3 kg) of pure honey - 7-9 rubles [9, pp. 64, 132-133].
  It is evident that the publishers would find it difficult to make ends meet with the annual stipend.
 377 HISTORY to tell the activities of the latter, especially the work done in the field of school construction [11, pp. 420-421].
 1827 One of the last preachers A. Dietrich, F. Zaremba, H. Hohenaker, G. Pfander and F. Haas re-established themselves in Shushi to operate among the region's Armenians and Muslims.
  During this time the Protestant missionary buildings were in fact ready [11, p. 421].
 The printing press was given a prominent place in the missionary work of the Protestant preachers.
  As we saw above, in 1825 Since October, measures have been taken to carry out printing works in Shushi.
  Until now, only the information provided by Leo about the establishment of the Shushi printing house was known, according to which the Protestant preachers invited a special printer, and the printing house was built in 1827. was already fully formed with Armenian letters assimilated in Moscow [1, p. 146; 2, pp. 92-93].
 We do not find new information about the foundation and initial activities of the Shushi printing house in the works of other researchers.
  We think this can be explained by the fact that other sources were not available to them.
  Thus, the above-mentioned information provided by Leo about the Shushi printing house is mainly read in the work "History of the Armenian Diocesan Theological School of Karabakh", in the preparation of which he used some archival documents, printed press and books as his main sources.
 While transmitting information about the activities of the Protestant preachers, Leon also refers to volumes VI, VII and VIII of the acts collected by the Caucasus Archaeological Commission ("Acts of the Collected Caucasian Archaeological Commission").
  There is also information about the activities of Protestant preachers in Shushi back in 1886. published by H. Ghukasyants in "Protestantism in the Armenians of the Caucasus (historical materials)" [5, pp. 1-34], which was used by Leon.
  H. While preparing this work, Ghukasyants again took the volumes of the above-mentioned acts as a basis [5, page 1].
 378 HISTORY In addition to the above-mentioned sources, we also know the official reports of the Protestant preachers of Shushi, which were published in 1827-1835. They appeared in German-language magazines on evangelical missionary work and biblical societies in Basel ("Magazin für die Armenology" was first mentioned by Professor A. Manukyan of the University of Friborg (Switzerland) [14, pp. 119-142].
  However, while using the mentioned magazines, the latter mostly refers to the missionary activities of the Protestant preachers in Shushi.
  Meanwhile, no research has been done on their printing activities so far.
 Examining these reports in Old German gave us a wealth of valuable insights into the printing activities of the Protestant preachers in Shushi.
  In particular, in 1827 In the fall, Protestant publishers received a printing press and the necessary printing materials [11, p. 421].
  And already in November, a young Circassian young J. arrived in Shushi. Aberkrombie (J. Aberkrombie), who was to work as a printer in the printing house of the Protestant preachers.
  The latter was redeemed from captivity by the Scottish preachers of Carras, receiving their education and upbringing.
  Ջ. According to Protestant preachers, Abercrombie gained experience in printing in Astrakhan.
  He was to publish Christian books in Armenian and Tatar-Turkish [11, pp. 421, 424].
  This printer worked for Protestant preachers for about three years [8, pp. 324, 328].
  In fact, in addition to Armenian books, the Shushi-based printing house planned to publish books in foreign languages, particularly in Tatar-Turkish, about which we read in the reports of the Protestant preachers.
  Let us also mention that in 1834 At the beginning of 1835, Protestant preachers received Persian fonts purchased from London, after which only in 1835. Tatar-Turkish and Persian 379 HISTORY food books were published in Shushi with the permission of Caucasian censorship [13, p. 378; 8, pp. 324, 328].
  Therefore, until 1835, the Shushi printing house published exclusively Armenian books.
 Examining the reports of the Protestant preachers reveals another interesting fact.
  The printing house of Shushi received the printing paper from Moscow, which was connected with great difficulties [12, p. 473].
 It should be noted that along with the establishment of a printing house in Shushi, the Protestant preachers also started organizing a college.
  Speaking about the date of founding of the college, the preachers state in the official state records in the acts collected by the Caucasus Archaeological Commission that it was founded in the middle of 182736, and we do not find any information about the founding date of the printing house in the mentioned acts.
  We only know that in 1828 The printing house of the Protestant preachers had Armenian fonts [8, p. Since the beginning of the school, the Protestant preachers have mentioned several difficulties related to the textbooks.
  In particular, the future success of the college was connected with the availability of quality and affordable textbooks.
  The latter mentioned that the Grabar textbooks were difficult to access. In the first academic year (1828) about 130 students studied here, who were mainly from poor Armenian families.
  The first teacher was one of the former Armenian students of the Moscow Lazarian Seminary, preacher F. Nazaryan (Nassarean) from Moscow with Haas [11, p. 420].
  The only existing classroom was later reorganized into two, where until 1830. He also taught in the middle of the 19th century. Progressive and well-known pedagogue-clergyman Paul.
  In college, students learned to read and write in Armenian, grammar in their mother tongue, studied the New Testament and, in part, the Old Testament, and made transfers from Old Armenian to the world.
  Protestant foreign preachers taught arithmetic and geography, compiling Armenian textbooks for students, and some Russian.
  They also taught Greek, Latin, English, and Hebrew in private lessons.
  The Protestant preachers of Shushi not only published educational books for the needs of the local school, but also used the same Armenian books published elsewhere.
  And sometimes, by re-editing those books, they republished them in their printing house [7, p. 309].
 380 HISTORY, so they considered it expedient to compile and edit new publications from the existing Armenian books, which would be understandable to the students of the college.
  Taking into account these concerns, the Protestant preachers gave instructions to A. Dietrich and F. Haasin, the first of whom studied Old Armenian with Archimandrite Mikael Sallantyan in Moscow, and the second of whom had mastered the Armenian dialect of Karabakh [5, pp. 3, 8].
  These two preachers in 1827. At the end of the year, they started compiling textbooks available for the needs of the school [11, p. 439].
  It is interesting that the first editions of the printing house were textbook editions.
  For obvious reasons, the printing house did not operate only for textbook publications.
  Many religious preaching books were also published during the period of the printing house.
 It should be noted that in Shushi in 1827-1835. During the activity of the printing house of the Protestants, the printing house of the Mother See of Etchmiadzin (1821-1833) was not functioning.
  In fact, the Shushi printing house was the only functioning printing house in Eastern Armenia at that time.
  The following lines of Leo are noteworthy in this context. "Only this printing house was, in itself, a beautiful phenomenon in the dark reality of Shushi, which even Etchmiadzin could envy with its imperfect printing house" [2, p. 93].
 Summing up the above, let us emphasize that the establishment of Protestant preachers in the city of Shushi, on the outskirts of tsarist Russia, their work in the field of education and publishing, in addition to material and organizational resources, required determination and unwavering dedication.
  Therefore, this activity of the Protestant preachers must be evaluated impartially.
  The establishment of a college in Shushi gave them a wide opportunity to educate Armenian youth of different classes, and the printing house made educational textbooks, educational, religious and other publications available to different segments of society.
 .
