In any society, the reliability of the parties to economic relations is the most important factor.
  The reliability of the state is conditioned by the stability of economic, political, social and other spheres.
  One of the guarantees of economic stability is the state debt index.
  In recent years, there has been a tendency of growth in the state debt of the Republic of Armenia, both external and internal (see Table 1).
 Table 1 RA STATE DEBT 2012-2017 (BILLION DRAMS) 1 RA Government Debt, including External Debt Internal Debt Effective management of public debt is one of the most important issues of the Republic of Armenia, as the public debt is growing faster than the GDP ( see Table 2.
 State Debt Bulletins of the Republic of Armenia 2012-2017 48 ECONOMICS Table 2 RA GROSS DOMESTIC RESULT 2012-2016 (BILLION DRAMS) 2 Comparing the data in Table 1 and Table 2, the dynamics of the public debt / GDP ratio becomes clear.
 At the end of 2015, it was 48.8%, which does not exceed the 50% threshold set by the RA Law on Public Debt, so it is within the manageable range, but in December 2016, compared to the same period last year, the RA public debt increased. 222.5 billion drams or 17.2%, making 56.8% of the GDP.
 In recent years, more than 90% of the state debt of the Republic of Armenia is the debt of the Government of the Republic of Armenia, which as of January 31, 2017 amounted to 91.4%, amounting to 2653.9 billion drams, of which 79.2% was acquired. from external sources.
 62.4% of the debt of the RA Government are foreign loans and credits, which make 1655.3 billion drams.
 Since 2014, the public debt of the Republic of Armenia has started to grow at a faster pace, which is conditioned by the funds received more than planned for foreign loans, as well as the higher performance of expenditures in relation to income NSS NSS, Time series, GDP (05.10.17) with a high rate of deficit financing at the expense of treasury bonds3.
 In its October 2016 report4, the International Monetary Fund predicted that Armenia would find it difficult to reduce or at least maintain its current level of public debt, and that in 2018 Armenia's public debt would exceed the legal threshold of 60%, given the high level of poverty. Emphasizing the need to overcome the existing challenges and ensure growth for all segments of the population.
 According to the above-mentioned law, when the state debt of the Republic of Armenia exceeds 50% of the GDP, the threshold defined by law, the government must implement a policy of reducing expenditures, bringing the budget deficit to a maximum of 3% of GDP.
 However, on June 23, 2015, the RA Law on Making Amendments to the RA Law on State Debt was adopted, according to which the phrase “state debt” in the law was replaced by the phrase “government debt” 5.
 The latter, in fact, means that the amount of state debt does not include the amount of state debt owed to the Central Bank of Armenia.
  Therefore, a new opportunity is created to increase the public debt burden.
 By the decision N 723-N of July 7, 2016, the Government of the Republic of Armenia approved the “Government Debt Management Plan for 2017-2019. Strategic Program ”, which presents a report on the attraction of borrowed funds and financing the implementation of the State Budget of the Republic of Armenia for 2015, defined by the legislation of the Republic of Armenia and the economic development programs of the Government of the Republic of Armenia. Strategic plan, www.mfe.am/index.php?fl=7617&lang=1 (05.10.17), 50 ECONOMICS management strategy.
  It is published annually and contributes to the predictable and transparent management of government debt.
 The strategy discusses the tendencies of the RA government's debt growth, possible risks, analyzes and forecasts for the past, current and coming years, and certain solutions are proposed, which, however, are very general and abstract.
  Unfortunately, it does not contain continuous, targeted and clear steps and actions to reduce the debt of the Government of the Republic of Armenia, it should include a wider range of public debt management tools replacement actions, etc.).
 The increase of the state debt threatens the bankruptcy of the state and leaves the burden of the state debt to future generations, which, in fact, contradicts the provision on the freedom and general welfare of the generations defined by the RA Constitution6.
 Public debt management is a set of tactical and strategic measures, which includes servicing the public debt, assuming new obligations, regulating the volume and structure of debt, ensuring their targeted and effective use.
 The management of the state debt must first of all presuppose the maintenance of the internal and external state debt at the level at which the country's economy is not endangered and the state fulfills its obligations.
  In order to keep the public debt manageable, it is important to consider a number of other issues, including the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, introductory part, 51 ECONOMICS , Timely and proper provision of repayment of state loans and their interest,  Diversification of debt obligations according to different indicators (terms, interest rate, etc.), կարգ Regulation and coordination of work of all responsible state entities in the process of attracting, servicing, selling and repaying public debt; other problems.
 The establishment of a unified public debt management system of the Republic of Armenia will be of great importance for the efficiency of public debt management.
 The unified system of public debt management must ensure: Միաս Integration of accounting and planning of internal and external government liabilities, servicing and repayment processes, normal interaction;  Implementation of public debt obligations with minimal costs, risks and negative impact on the economy; ժամանակ Timely and proper implementation of obligations to domestic and foreign creditors without additional arrangements; 52 ECONOMICS  Full implementation of all public debt parameters
 Thus, public debt management should be carried out through the development and implementation of an optimal unified system of operations in terms of methodology, accounting and organization.
 .
