The main factor of socio-economic development of each country is its scientific and technical potential, which is a real precondition for the application of norms.
  This is evidenced by the results of research conducted in the Republic of Armenia, which show that the strategic horizons (visions) for the formation of a national innovation system in the Republic of Armenia include the following stages:  Until 2014 - Development of existing capacities and filling gaps,  Until 2017 - Scaling up of initiatives and capacity building  By 2020 - Armenia HUM Global Center1.
 The studies conducted and the experience of advanced countries in this field show that the following challenges are considered key in the Armenian economy: 1. Sharp increase of technological gap between globally developed and developing countries at the expense of the latest technological clusters in developed economies, represented by 5th and 6th. Rooting of technological developments of Kondratev waves and ensuring economic flight based on them.
 2. The sharp increase in the level of competition in the world market for high-tech and scientific products. It practically leaves the developing countries out of the main game and turns them into dumb observers of that process, or, at best, the technology outlined by them. Protocol Decision No. 6 of the February 17 sitting, page 6.
 111 ECONOMICS Track imitators or suppliers of basic resources.
 3. Greater development of high-tech value-added, in particular, value-added chains in the world economy by a small number of developed countries, provides even greater proportions of income and living standards for the population of those countries, leaving the majority of the world's population to prosperity. not great opportunities.
  A.Sh. Margaryan has a similar opinion2.
 It is obvious that the technological developments of the world market leave their mark on the country's resource opportunities and limitations, which in turn has a significant impact on the development and implementation of innovative policies.
 This is evidenced by various expert assessments: the new high-tech reproduction axis in the world economy, which will be based on the 6th Kondratev technological bunch, will be formed in the next 1.5-2 decades.
  The core technologies of this axis will be interdisciplinary, interdisciplinary and convergent technologies based on nanotechnologies, biotechnologies and information technologies in various and non-standard combinations.
 Solutions based on these technological clusters will allow to obtain fundamentally new products, the parameters and consumer properties of which will be fundamentally unavailable to countries with economies anchored on the 4th or 5th "Kondratev waves".
 At present, there is a problem in Armenia to define a common vision for the formation of an innovative economy and to develop a comprehensive strategy that will integrate the existing and ongoing initiatives in the Republic of Armenia in a common context.
 See Innovative Technological Modernization of the RA Economy in the Conditions of Long-Term Institutional Transformation Margaryan A. Sh. Page 16.
 112 ECONOMICS The studies show that the vector of institutional transformations of the existing and starting initiatives in the Republic of Armenia should be directed to the above 3 challenges, which will contribute to making the steps more purposeful and effective.
  It is obvious that considering the current and starting innovative policies in the Republic of Armenia in a common context, it is possible to develop a comprehensive strategy of the innovative economy, the core of which should be the solution of the following issues: 1. Development of human capital and prevention of emigration.
 2. Implementation and promotion of effective innovative investment policy.
 3. Ensuring real economic growth.
 4. Creation of an effective scientific-educational system.
 5. Creation and development of venture firms, holding companies and clusters.
 6. Development and effective use of scientific and technical potential.
 7. Improving the legislative and judicial systems.
 8. Implementation of predictable tax policy, etc.
 At the core of the solution to these problems is the alarming demographic situation, which is the primary challenge to our society.
  Because it has a serious socio-economic, political and strategic significance.
 It is noteworthy that in 2014, the government carried out certain work on demographic issues, which stemmed from the provisions of the RA demographic policy strategy and measures to ensure its implementation, taking into account the 2013 budget in the country. Demographic developments recorded during
  In 2014, the “2015-2017 Demographic Improvement Plan for the Republic of Armenia” was developed. National Program ”3, 14.05.2016) (entry day: ECONOMICS, which includes measures aimed at ensuring the natural growth of the population, material incentives for births, reduction of mortality, support for young and large families.
  On January 1, 2014, a program of state support for families encouraging births and improving the living conditions of large families was introduced, in the framework of which the amount of benefits for the birth of the third and fourth children was set at 1 million drams. , and in case of the birth of the 5th and each subsequent child - 1.5 million drams.
 Moreover, in both cases, 500 thousand drams is provided in cash, and the rest - non-cash, as family money.
 It should be noted that in recent years the Armenian government has developed and implemented many programs to improve the demographic situation, but the current emigration has deeper reasons, in particular the low level of economic growth, distrust, emigration of scientific potential and so on.
  As for the development of the country's economic growth, it should be noted that according to 2014-2025.  4 ումների Macroeconomic forecasts: Over the next 11 years, according to the program, the share of investments in the expenditure structure of GDP will increase, stabilizing at 28-29%.
  At the same time, it is expected that the trend initiated after the crisis will prevail in the structure of investments in the forecasted years. Non-productive capital construction (especially construction of apartments and buildings) will decrease, reflecting the above-mentioned sectoral GDP developments.
  In such a situation, investments in GDP will exceed the level recorded in the post-crisis years, and the level of productive investments will satisfy the development of other sectors of the economy.
  Such a development will give an opportunity in the future to grow by 1% compared to the current 27.9%, which is certainly good, but I think it is not enough - the current http.
 //armef.com/en/news/verlutsutyun/article_1397275062/ (accessed 28.05.2016) 114 ECONOMICS To meet the challenges and further develop the economy.
 It is clear that the economic growth of the country is conditioned by the implementation of an effective innovation policy, therefore the following processes have been implemented in the Republic of Armenia in order to support and promote innovative activities. The Gyumri Technology Center was put into operation, and the laboratories operating in the temporary (leased) area and a number of local and international companies were moved to the renovated building of the center5.
  On September 13, 2014, the official opening of the center took place.
  The center currently houses D-Link, Digital Pomegranate, GNCAlpha, I-Works, Skyline Studio, Time Production, Gyumri Information Technology Center, and Gyumri Language House.
  GTC has initiated the "Start-up Club", which aims to develop entrepreneurship among young people.
 Professional trainings were organized in Gyumri Technology Center, which were attended by 810 students and 7 specialists in the main directions of socio-economic development policy in 2014.
 Business support and advice was provided to 176 companies and teams.
  A number of events were held at the GTC, including the first major international technology conference "iGyumri" in Gyumri.
  Within the framework of cooperation with the Armenian Competitiveness Foundation (NCFA) at the Armenian Center for Excellence in Oncology, an agreement was reached with the Catholic University of Leuven (Belgium) to use the FDG [18F] isotope to be produced at the Radioisotope Production Center I. With the involvement of specialists of the National Scientific Laboratory after Alikhanyan, as well as special training and retraining of medical staff.
 14.05.2016) (date of entry: ECONOMICS) The extension of the loan agreement signed on November 23, 2010 between the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Armenia (Borrower) and KBC NV Bank (Lender) was organized to finance the Cyclotron Program Agreement.
  Between the RA Ministry of Economy and IBA company in 2010 The SPECT-CT combined system supplied under the Cyclotron Project Agreement, signed on November 23, 2014. He was brought to Armenia on December 9.
 In this respect, the period until 2020 in the innovation sphere of the CIS member states is remarkable.
  The following works have been carried out within the framework of the interstate cooperation program. 1. The Ministry of Economy of the Republic of Armenia has established a National Contact Center in the National Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurship.
 2. Participation in the 13th and 14th sittings of the Interstate Council for Cooperation in Scientific, Technical and Innovation Spheres of the CIS countries was ensured.
 3. The implementation of the program took place in 2015-16. Discussion of youth policy issues within the framework of the project and program of events.
 These steps taken to support and promote innovation are perhaps significant, but today we are at a stage where we have to run several times faster.
  In other words, these rapid developments and changes in the world economy force us to reconsider and quickly orient ourselves to transform our strategic decisions, which will ensure the sharp growth of the Armenian economy.
 Studies show that the sharp growth of the Armenian economy can be ensured especially due to the development of industry and, in particular, the sphere of high innovative technologies.
  However, in recent years Armenia has made considerable progress in the IT sector and as of 2016 ranks 56th among 139 countries.
 116 ECONOMICS It should be noted that in terms of innovation potential, Armenia, according to the Global Innovation Potential Index 6, in 2014 Armenia ranked 79th in the world, which increased by 3 points compared to 2012, but this innovative The ideas do not materialize mainly due to lack of funds, trust, lack of state support and other reasons.
 2015 At the 14th annual congress of the Union of Information Technology Enterprises (UITE) held in Yerevan on April 11, the UITE 2014-2018 program was presented. The draft strategy 7, which aims to make the high technology sector the main direction of the national strategy for economic development.
 Studies and economic practice show that the world's most advanced economies in the field of innovation have undergone significant structural changes in the last two decades.
  The key feature of these changes is the growing importance of knowledge in all areas of economic activity.
 The concept of knowledge-based economy arose from the full realization of the role of knowledge in economic growth.
  The term knowledge-based economy was first used in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) documents to describe economies based directly on the creation, transfer and use of knowledge.
 It is noteworthy that in 2012-14. The development of the economy continued mainly at the expense of services and agriculture.
  The average growth of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in those years was about 4.7%.
  Moreover, in 2012-14. Growth was registered in all branches of the economy, except for construction.
 http:
 //www.armstat.am/en/?id=1585&nid=80 (accessed on 22.10.2017)% 86% D5% B8% D6% 80% D5% B4% D5% A1% D6% 81% D5 ( Date of entry: 22.10.2017) OF ARMENIA (date of entry: 02.10.2017) 117 ECONOMICS During the mentioned period 2.0 percentage points of economic growth were ensured at the expense of services, and the real growth was 5.2%, 0.7% of economic growth was ensured at the expense of industry: In the conditions of 4% real growth, 1.6% of the economic growth was ensured at the expense of agriculture, in the conditions of 8.3% real growth.
  Construction decreased by an average of 2.3%, contributing negatively to economic growth by 0.3 percentage points.
 In the medium term, according to the 2016-18 budget approved by the RA Government on July 8, 2015. Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) 9, projected average annual GDP growth of 3.2%, mainly due to services and agriculture.
  RA Economy 2015 Based on the developments of the first months and the growth of the world economy in 2015. 1% economic growth was forecast for 2015 (while GDP growth in 2015 was 3%), and in 2016-18. Annual real GDP growth is projected at 2%, 3.5% and 4%, respectively, while the contribution of services and agriculture to the average GDP growth of 3.2% will be 1.2 and 0.9 percentage points, respectively.
 For comparison, global economic growth was projected at 3.5% in 2015, and in 2016, US economic growth was estimated at about 2.6%, which will accelerate in the forecast horizon, reaching about 3.2% in 2017. .
 In this regard, international organizations forecast a decline in economic growth in Russia in 2015 from -3% to 5.5%, which lasted until mid-2016, and only in 2017 will be observed economic activity - an increase of about 0.7%.
 Of course, such an economic downturn in Russia creates great risks for the economic activity of the Republic of Armenia, but on the middle (entry date 15.10.2017) (entry date: 18.09.2017) ECONOMICS period of stable growth of prices in the raw materials and food markets and in the world market Rising oil prices will help neutralize those risks.
 The medium-term forecasts were based on the registered trends and peculiarities of economic development, the expectations and analyzes of the world economy presented by international organizations, as well as the medium-term state policy directions presented by the line ministries11.
 Thus, in the medium term, the share of the export sector in the economy will increase (industry and agriculture were considered in the export sector).
 2012-14 it averaged 37.5% of GDP.
  The economy will continue to follow the path set in the post-crisis years, and the exportable sector of the economy will make up 37.7% of GDP.
 It is clear that an effective innovation policy can be implemented in the context of a knowledge-based economy, which is based on innovation, which is the expression of effective application of knowledge, when the added economic value is obtained by transforming knowledge into new products, processes and services.
  Therefore, the promotion of innovative activities is a particularly important issue for the state due to the purposeful development and effective use of scientific, technological and innovative potential.
 An essential component of the success of an innovation activity is the state policy of shaping its environment, which is implemented through the creation of a legal framework regulating innovation activity, legislative and normative-legal mechanisms.
 Thus, on May 23, 2006, the RA Law on State Support to Innovation Activities was adopted on 19.09.2017. Forms of state support.
 In this regard, it should be noted that in 2014, the state budget allocated 9.3 billion drams from the state budget for scientific and scientific-educational activities to 12 "General research work" classes, which amounted to 99.8% of the planned index.
  Compared to the previous year, the mentioned expenses increased by 6.8%, mainly conditioned by the increase of the expenses for maintenance and development of the infrastructures of scientific and scientific-technical activity.
  Researchers were provided with 366.8 million drams in bonuses for scientific degrees from the RA state budget in 2014, ensuring 98.7% performance and 4.2% more than the previous year, due to the increase in the number of scientists receiving bonuses.
  Within the framework of the "Fundamental and Important Applied Research of Scientific and Scientific-Technical Activities" program, 14.4 million drams were provided to the RA Ministry of Diaspora, at the expense of which 12 scientific researches related to the Diaspora were ordered.
 During the same period, the RA state budget expenditures increased by 33.3% as compared to 1991, due to the increase in the number of researches.
  Expenditures on maintenance and development of scientific and technical infrastructure amounted to more than 7.1 billion drams or 99.8% of the planned.
  Compared to the previous year, the mentioned expenses increased by 8.7%, mainly conditioned by the increase in the number of conferences.
  "A. Alikhanyan National Scientific Laboratory Foundation's program for maintenance and development of infrastructure and modernization of scientific infrastructure and modernization of scientific potential amounted to 714.1 million drams, fully ensuring the program index.
  Of course, it was 15.09.2017) (entry date: ECONOMICS Compared to the previous years, the mentioned expenses in 2015, 2016 and 2017 did not change significantly.
 The concept of the strategy aimed at forming a knowledge-based economy and supporting innovative activities in Armenia envisages the integration of related socio-economic spheres, in particular, science, education, fiscal, industrial and export promotion policies in one complete context.
 I think that in order to face the above-mentioned challenges and form a knowledge-based economy, it is expedient to accept the establishment of the world-famous, rapidly developing forensic science in Armenia, which is based on everything related to electronics, including information recovery, control, secret. and open transfer.
 Forensics is a collaboration between different sciences (psychology, pedagogy, biology, economics, physiology, physics, mathematics, programming, engineering and many other sciences).
  According to the president of the company Technologies, which deals with this science, forensic science in 13 countries today costs 700 billion. It has a market of more than a dollar.
 The demand for specialists in this field in the world is more than 92%.
  In 2015, the above-mentioned company founded TSD company in Armenia in accordance with the RA Law on Free Economic Zones and produces tablets in Armenia.
 According to the researches made and the ambitions of this company, if in the next 5 years the company will be able to bring 0.003% of the forensic market to Armenia and produce the required products here due to the properly trained specialists, then See http.
 //armef.com/en/news/verlutsutyun/texnologiakan-zargacumy-mer-miakchanaparhn-e/ (accessed on 01.11.2017) 121 ECONOMICS It will be possible to bring 5 times more money from the budget of Armenia.
 The new strategy aims to turn the high technology sector into the main direction of the national economic development strategy.
  In this regard, one of the important provisions of the Strategy refers to the support of Armenian products, start-ups based on Armenian solutions, their formation and promotion.
  Due to that, it is possible to bring a large amount of additional value to Armenia in the form of profit, which is a hundred times more than the amount of salaries of the employees engaged in that activity.
 Taking into account the global challenges and the existing geopolitical and territorial factors of the Republic of Armenia, the development of information technologies for the development of the economy of the Republic of Armenia is a more perspective and accessible direction.
  Because without an effective strategy for the development of information technologies, it is impossible to claim to be among the developed countries.
  And developing other directions of industry is more difficult, less efficient and difficult.
 Thus, by forming and developing the relevant perspective components of the national innovation system, it will be possible to achieve the strategic goal of Armenia's innovation policy, making Armenia a global center of technological research and development.
 .
