The individual as a bearer of fundamental rights and freedoms.
  In order to clarify the scope of fundamental rights of the recipients of limited rights, as well as the holders of fundamental rights and freedoms, it is necessary to start the analysis with the wording of Article 3 of the RA Constitution, such as “Respect for and protection of fundamental human and civil rights and freedoms. The responsibilities of the government are "," public power is limited to the basic human rights and freedoms and freedoms as a directly valid right "or, in general, from the wording of the second chapter of the RA Constitution," Basic human and civil rights and freedoms ".
 172 JURISDICTION These concepts allow us to state that the holder of fundamental rights is in principle a human being.
  However, it should be emphasized that it is obvious from the very formulations that not only the human rights, but also the basic rights and freedoms of the RA citizens are recognized and guaranteed at the constitutional level.
 States, not only at the level of fundamental rights, but also in the case of rights defined by law, in principle grant them to their citizens, and the fundamental rights in the absence of the need for citizenship, also to foreigners and stateless persons.
  The so-called political rights are envisaged exclusively for the citizens, in order to be holders of which it is necessary to have the citizenship of the Republic of Armenia.
  The constitutional basis for this approach must first be sought in Article 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, which clearly states that "Power in the Republic of Armenia belongs to the people and the people exercise their power through free elections, referendums, as well as state and local self-government bodies and officials through individuals. ”
  Following Article 1, which sets out the characteristics of the statehood established by the Constitution, the basic principles of organization and activity, it proves a very important principle. The system of state power, its sovereignty are derived from the people, its sovereignty, the people have the status of a founder in the public system.
  The concept of "people" in the broadest political-legal sense implies the citizens united in one state.
 In a democracy, the exercise of power is established, legitimized and controlled by the people, that is, the citizens of the state.
 Democracy is a form of self-determination and self-government of the people, in which all citizens can participate on an equal basis [1, pp. 55-56].
 JURISDICTION It turns out that, depending on the type of subjective fundamental right, the RA Constitution determines the scope of their holders.
  This refers mainly to political rights, in which case the state can limit the scope of their holders to its citizens, as in Armenia, or allow foreigners to participate in the exercise of this or that political right (for example, the right to participate in elections in certain countries) [2, p. 124].
 It is noteworthy that individual states also allow foreigners to enjoy basic political rights.
  In particular, according to Article 8b of the Treaty on European Union (adopted on 7 February 1992), "Any citizen of the Union who resides in a State of which he is not a national (ie a foreigner within the meaning of his nationality) shall be entitled as a national of that State." has the right to take part in municipal elections (to be elected and to be elected). ”[3, p. Thus, EU Member States give active and passive suffrage to members of the Member States but not to their own country.
  Moreover, the mentioned provisions of the Treaty on European Union are also enshrined in the legislation of the member states.
  For example, Article 6 of the Spanish Law on the Rights and Freedoms of Aliens states that "Aliens have the right to vote in municipal elections in accordance with their laws and agreements".
 Despite the fact that in the legal literature at both national and local levels suffrage (active and passive) is accepted as a so-called political right, we believe that there are fundamental differences in terms of the exercise of this right at two different levels.
  First of all, it should be noted that the granting of suffrage to foreigners and stateless persons at the local 174 JURISDICTION level should be considered as an important stage of integration of the latter within the community, as well as an important "probationary period" for future citizenship (in the sense of active will at the local level).
  The fact that it is necessary to separate the issue of the political nature of the law in the case of national and local elections is also conditioned by the fact that in the case of local elections and referendums, by and large, political issues are not resolved.
  In this sense, the policy of states regarding the provision of suffrage to foreigners and stateless persons at the municipal level is justified by the logic of the policy of full realization of the latter, as well as integration policy.
 As for the issue of granting suffrage to foreigners and stateless persons during the national elections, at first glance it seems that this may be an important and final stage of their integration, but more important and fundamental is the question that such an opportunity gives people of that status in the country. the right to influence political life, which is fraught with dangers.
  According to one of the opinions in the legal literature, the granting of such a right is also necessary from the point of view that issues related to foreigners and stateless persons can be adopted at the legislative level (through a referendum) [5, pp. 177-189].
  First of all, it should be noted that the acts adopted at the level of the legislature or the referendum can not only apply to those foreigners or stateless persons currently residing in that state, but to all persons with such a status who will receive that status at different times.
  In other words, we think that the observations that it is necessary to give foreigners and stateless people the right to vote and participate in referendums, trying to connect it with having an indirect and (or) direct influence on the people to be resolved by those bodies (process).
  Without trying to elaborate on the issue within the framework of this work, we think that the issue should be considered from a regional political point of view13.
 The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia envisages basic rights such as the right to form and join parties, the right to vote and the right to participate in a referendum (except for local elections and referendums), the right to enter public service, etc., exclusively for the citizens of the Republic of Armenia.
 The rights, which by the force of the Constitution do not belong only to the citizens of the Republic of Armenia, belong to everyone.
 In this sense, the wording "everyone" is more common in the RA Constitution.
  In some cases, we can also come across the term "each", as a rule, when talking about the basic rights of persons of a separate status.
  For example, Part 2 of Article 57 of the RA Constitution guarantees the right to protection in case of unjustified dismissal of any employee.
  Or the right to strike is guaranteed for every person of the same status (Article In some cases, the content of the fundamental right or the provisions of the legislation may indicate the holder of that fundamental right).
  One of such rights is the right to political asylum.
  This right became a basic right as a result of the 2015 constitutional amendments.
  In particular, according to Article 54 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, “In the current stage of political persecution, the number of states where foreigners and non-citizens also participate in local elections also increases.
  In contrast, there are countries where people with this status have the right to participate in national elections, which is mainly due to regional and historical peculiarities (Australia, Great Britain, New Zealand, Chile, Uruguay).
 176 LAW Everyone has the right to seek political asylum in the Republic of Armenia. ”
  Pursuant to Part 1 of Article 3 of the RA Law on Political Asylum, “Political asylum is a special residence in the Republic of Armenia granted to a foreign citizen or stateless person (hereinafter referred to as a foreign citizen) in the manner prescribed by this Law, which aims at such status. to protect the foreign citizen who received it in the territory of the Republic of Armenia from the political persecutions to which he / she was subjected in the country of his / her citizenship or permanent residence, and to which he / she would be subject if he / she was not granted asylum in the Republic of Armenia.
  It is obvious from the content of the norm of the law that the subject of protection of this fundamental right guarantees the basic right of foreigners or stateless persons.
 Certain norms of Chapter 2 of the RA Constitution define guarantees for the protection of the rights of specific national minorities.
  In particular, according to Article 56 2 2, "Persons belonging to national minorities have the right to preserve and develop their traditions, religion, language and culture."
  However, this does not mean that, for example, the Armenian culture, language and ethnic identity are not guaranteed by the Constitution.
  The defense mechanisms for that are, first, Article 56, Part 1, "Everyone has the right to preserve their national and ethnic identity," and then Article 15, Part 2, according to which the "Armenian language and cultural heritage" They are under the care and protection of the state. "
 The issue of constitutional rights of parents and children is also a subject of separate discussion.
  In contrast to the right and responsibility of parents enshrined in the previous Constitution to take care of their children's upbringing, education, health, full and harmonious development, the amended Constitution also enshrined the issue of 14 children's rights, which had previously been guaranteed by law.
 Thus, regardless of whether the basic rights belong to the citizens of the Republic of Armenia or to foreigners (citizens), one thing is clear: a person is a holder of a fundamental right.
 Legal entity as a holder of fundamental rights and freedoms.
  As we can see from the wording of Article 3 of the RA Constitution, that is, "Man, ... fundamental rights and freedoms" and from the formulations in many articles of Chapter 2 ("everyone", "everyone", "every citizen", etc. people are the bearers of basic rights.
 However, in the constitutions of modern states we can find such formulations that "fundamental rights and freedoms also apply to legal entities insofar as those rights and freedoms are inherently applicable to them."
 In particular, Article 74 of the RA Constitution, which has such a content, allows legal entities to be considered to be holders of basic rights, provided that those rights and freedoms are applicable to the latter.
 There are many states whose Constitutions do not have legal regulations on the bearer of fundamental rights and freedoms of legal entities, in the conditions of which the constitutional possibility of protection by them is excluded.
  The Russian Federation is one of such states.
  The current Constitution of the Russian Federation, unlike its predecessor, does not mention legal entities in relation to the issue under discussion15.
  Moreover, according to Article 41, Part 1 of the Family Code of the Republic of Armenia, "A person is considered to be a person under the age of eighteen".
 [178] JUDICIARY The post-adoption of the 178 JURISDICTION case in the chapter "Economic System" of the 1978 Constitution of Soviet Russia also consistently denied the possibility of protection of fundamental rights of legal entities16 [6].
  An adequate approach to the problem can also be found at the doctrinal level [7, pp. 202-203].
 In this connection, N.V. Vitruk's position that the Constitutional Court in its practice protects not only the individual rights of a person and a citizen, but also the collective rights of people's collectives, municipal associations, rural and urban units [8, p. As mentioned, the positive reality in Armenia is different.
  In both the current RA Constitution and the 2005 text of the RA Constitution (Article 42.1), legal entities are also holders of subjective fundamental rights.
  However, the problem here is not in recognizing legal entities as bearers of their subjective fundamental rights, but in the need to distinguish between private and public legal entities in law and jurisprudence [9], which has been discussed in other work [10].
 It is obvious that the existing constitutional solutions guarantee the protection of the legal position of legal entities through fundamental rights.
  But here an important question arises. why it is necessary to provide legal entities with the opportunity to enjoy their basic rights.
  Going a little further, it is necessary to note that the constitutional solutions on considering legal entities as bearers of fundamental rights, from the aspect we are interested in, should be considered in the context of creating guarantees for the realization of human and civil rights and freedoms.
 If we look at the issue from the point of view of legal entities, it turns out that (negative substantiation of the issue) by not extending the basic rights to legal entities, we can not impose on them constitutional obligations such as paying taxes, duties, environmental protection.
  Such responsibilities are an integral part of the constitutional position of legal entities.
  In this sense, the Chief Advisor of the RF Constitutional Court V. Kuznetsov's observation that it is necessary to apply the norms of Chapter 2 to legal entities, noting that otherwise legal entities will not only be deprived of their basic rights, but also can not be considered a subject of constitutional obligations.
  The problem is more obvious in the case of Russia, when the Constitution is silent about being the bearer of the basic rights of legal entities.
 As we have mentioned, Article 74 of the RA Constitution allows legal entities to be considered as a subject of constitutional relations in the sense of being the bearers of basic rights and freedoms (if they are applicable to legal entities).
  Despite the fact that within the spatial interpretation of the above norm, certain constitutional obligations also apply to legal entities (as well as such obligations may be provided by ordinary laws), we still think that in terms of formal definition of constitutional norms, it would be correct if 74 Article 1 should be worded as follows: "Fundamental rights, freedoms and obligations also apply to legal entities insofar as those rights, freedoms and obligations are inherently applicable to them."
 Considering the issue in the context of defending the legal position of legal entities, the Dutch theorist R. Bergamin emphasizes that “bodies that are called upon to consider such complaints, in the absence of the above-mentioned constitutional provisions on legal entities, must decide on their own the admissibility of such complaints [12, p. 106].
  It should be noted that legal entities can also bring administrative complaints about the violation of their rights.
  In this sense, given the fact that in the absence of the above-mentioned constitutional provisions, the question of the admissibility of this issue may be resolved within the limits of constitutional justice (in the legal positions of the CC, given that the interpretation of the Constitution is the sole prerogative of the CC). In the absence of positive solutions and without precedent (legal position of the CC), the administrative bodies have the opportunity 181 JURISDICTION to resolve the issue of the admissibility of such complaints within the limits of their decisions.
  The position of the authoritative theorist can be considered relevant only in determining the issue of the admissibility of legal entities' complaints within the framework of the constitutional complaint, which should become applicable to other bodies in the future by virtue of the precedent.
 In our opinion, the view in the legal literature that the provision of such rights is also important from the point of view of protecting the rights of individuals (members of the legal entity) is considered to be rightly considered to be the subjective fundamental rights of legal entities. [13]
  Thus, the Dutch theorist S. According to Dan Deckerker Biasterfeld, not only individuals but also ecclesiastical and religious communities have the right to freedom of religion [14, p. 85].
  This is also the position of the ECHR [15].
  Legal entities may also find themselves in a situation where the public authorities, as in the case of individuals, try or directly interfere in the interests of the latter. In other words, the protection of such interests will not be possible without the constitutional guarantees provided to legal entities, such as fundamental rights. The case law of European countries has the following approach to this issue.
  The legal position of the German Constitutional Court is that legal persons can be holders of fundamental rights only if the latter, depending on the nature of their formation and activity, are forms of free exercise of the rights of the individuals behind them.
  The legal position of the French Constitutional Court (Constitutional Council), which has considered the issue from the point of view of equality of legal entities, is that unequal treatment of legal entities may also lead to unequal treatment of natural persons behind the last 182 JURISDICTION, which is inadmissible [18] ].
 By and large, it is necessary to consider not only the interests of members of legal entities (for example, as mentioned above, members of religious organizations), but also the interests of other individuals who in certain situations can not exercise their rights without the guaranteed constitutional status of legal entities.
  Thus, a person cannot exercise his right to receive information if, for example, freedom of the press is not guaranteed.
  The transparency of the electoral process, the right of the electorate to get acquainted with the program goals of the people involved in the political struggle, cannot be guaranteed if the legal entities (in this sense, the media) are not given the freedom to cover the election campaign, organize debates and broadcast them.
  In this sense, the idea of ​​a democratic state will also be aborted.
  The ECHR has also expressed legal positions on the fundamental rights of the press and freedom of the press to legal entities.
  In particular, in the case of Groper Radio Foreign Affairs and others v. Switzerland, it is stated that the freedom to disseminate information and ideas complements the freedom to receive information and ideas.
  According to the Court, this is true not only for the print media, but also for radio and television.
  With regard to the latter, the Court emphasizes that the State is obliged not to interfere in the process of transmitting and receiving information (status negativus), as both the recipient and the giver have the freedom to communicate directly at will.
 Of particular importance is the Court's approach that state interference with the fundamental right under consideration in connection with the licensing process cannot be related to other forms than technical issues.
  The ECtHR also expressed a similar legal position in the case of Cascado Coca v. Spain [19, pp. 18,19, 34, 106].
 183 JURISDICTION Thus, the need to protect the constitutional position of legal entities through subjective fundamental rights, in other words, the constitutional decision to recognize legal entities as bearers of their fundamental rights is important not only for clarifying their constitutional status (the members behind them) but also for a legal, democratic state. , based on the logic of creating guarantees for the realization of the rule of law, for the realization of the subjective rights of individuals.
 .
