Export-oriented development strategies are often compared to in-house development strategies.
  External orientation and state interventions are different problems [3, p.2].
  In order to ensure the country's economic growth and prosperity, it is necessary for exports to exceed imports for the following reasons: y For countries with small markets, exports are a key factor in development.
  As the market size and sales opportunities increase due to participation in foreign trade, the average production costs decrease and consequently the profit level increases.
 y More competitive conditions in the international market 62 In the ECONOMICS, the external economy seeks to improve the effectiveness of its supply.
  Competitive pressure can also lead to wider positive changes in the economy and increase management efficiency by accelerating technical progress and providing constant communication with foreign institutions and ideas [18 p.11].
 The growing globalization of industry and markets has changed the competitive environment in which existing organizations operate, which gives modern organizations both new opportunities and new challenges.
  In this context, a lot of research has been done to understand a number of important factors for organizations to be present in foreign countries [6 p.124 In order to ensure the external orientation of the economy, the support of the state is needed to stimulate exports.
  First of all, export barriers created to protect imports must be removed.
 Import protection can hinder exports in two ways: it reduces the competitiveness of local producers in the international market by increasing the cost of imported raw materials in the production of exporters, which in turn reduces the incentive of the producer compared to the importer [18 p.11].
  Second, for a start-up local manufacturer-exporter, exporting goods to the national market is a difficult and costly process and needs state support.
  In this case, exporters subsidized by the state may have comparative advantages in the international market by ousting a competitor organization by obtaining a monopoly profit [8 p. 83].
  When implementing an export promotion strategy, the state must shift its resources from less efficient to more efficient production.
  The most important obstacle faced by organizations in developing countries in presenting their products to the international market is 63 ECONOMICS.
  The process of producing a competitive product that meets the requirements of the international market is also an important challenge in Armenia.
  In this regard, it is important for the local producer to provide foreign market analysis and professional assistance by the state, as obtaining information and market analysis, especially for small and medium-sized businesses, is a very costly and difficult process.
  It is important to use all the available opportunities, for example, today the Internet has given an opportunity to a number of RA citizens to work in foreign organizations, online.
  The knowledge, skills, experience and capabilities of such a workforce should be used in local market organizations to produce products that are competitive in the international market.
 When developing an export-promoting policy, of course, the state should also consider the costs of implementing it, as in this case other government expenditures are reduced, such as providing subsidies to companies that target the social sector or supply the local market.
  When talking about the export promotion strategy, it is also necessary to refer to some negative consequences, which may appear as a result of the introduction of the wrong policy.
  According to this view, the reason for incorrect distribution of resources may be state interventions in the market [9 p.779].
  In this case, the need to promote exports by the state is questioned.
  In addition, the easing of tax policy during the stimulus policy leads to a reduction in tax revenues to the budget.
  Given that many developing countries do not have a sufficient tax base, this can lead to large losses.
  In the case of such a policy, the financial flows to private organizations are managed by the state, the inefficient implementation of which can lead to the crediting of inefficient projects, and consequently the violation of the debt-capital ratio in the banking system.
  As a result of all this, some exporting companies may succeed, but producers and taxpayers in general will suffer for the local market.
 Export promotion interventions are a priority in Armenia today.
  The limited resources of the state budget in themselves imply directing those funds in such directions as possible, which in the medium and long term will lead to large financial flows and guarantee the activation of business, the country's economic progress and, consequently, the increase of budget opportunities at the expense of domestic funds.
 Due to the fact that exports are a component of GDP, export growth leads to GDP growth, but on equal terms.
  Studies of a number of economists also testify to the positive correlation between GDP and exports [12 p. 49-53].
  There are some empirical studies that test this connection.
  Empirical literature began with regression analysis, which tests for correlation.
  Avocuse used the Johansson consolidation test and the Granger causal test based on the error correction model based on Argentina, Colombia, and Peru to show that there was some empirical evidence for the export-based growth hypothesis.
  Iyer, Rambadi, and Tang used the autoregressive model of the consolidation vector, supplemented by the Granger causal test, to show that exports did not significantly measure Australia's economic growth.
  In fact, the different results of export-driven economic growth hypotheses often depend on the choice of test methods and period.
  A number of economic growth studies driven by export growth have been conducted, which mainly come to confirm this hypothesis.
 Armenia, being a developing country with a small domestic market, in order to have a stable and significant economic growth, must also adopt a policy aimed at promoting exports, and 65 exports will become the main driving force for GDP growth.
 In terms of the impact on economic growth, the specific type of exported product is also important.
  Koh and Death used the unification test and the error correction test on the example of Korea.
  Their study showed that the growth of exports of non-textile products (such as the heavy and chemical industry) compared to textiles, led to higher levels of economic growth and vice versa.
  Trade liberalization has also had a positive effect on the Korean economy.
  Malaysian studies have also shown that the country's economic growth is largely due to the export of finished products rather than raw materials [19, p. 213].
 When developing an export promotion policy, it is necessary to clearly define the priorities, goals and develop a strategy.
  When developing the strategy, it is necessary to ensure the implementation of the following points [2]. 3⁄4 Creating a Debt Scheme.
  This creates a special scheme that will monitor, for example, the raw materials imported for the final product in exporting companies and will create preferential conditions for import, or will reduce the prepayments of duties for exporting companies in order to reduce the amount of necessary loans.
 3⁄4 Increase credit availability.
  The provision of short-term and long-term loans is very important for the development of exporting companies, especially in the case of small and medium-sized businesses.
  In this regard, it is important to create a lending system in the Republic of Armenia through state efforts, which will provide soft loans to organizations that have export potential or are exporting companies.
 3⁄4 Simplification of state regulation systems.
 Bureaucratic hassles and lengthy processes are an obstacle to export promotion, they should be simplified to 66 ECONOMICS.
  At the same time, it is necessary to create a database for all exporting companies on import policies, procedures, technical requirements, market analysis, etc. in foreign countries.
 . 3⁄4 Promoting networking between entrepreneurs.
  The state can also create platforms for entrepreneurs to communicate and establish new partnerships, which will promote new ideas and exchange experiences and information.
 Many developing countries rely heavily on raw material exports, which make up the bulk of their exports.
  Some studies show that countries that focus on exports of finished products are growing faster than countries that export raw materials.
  Armenia mostly exports raw materials, ready-made food, precious and semi-precious stones and metals, non-precious metals.
  Moreover, their share is significantly higher than other exported goods.
  In other words, Armenia's exports continue to be concentrated around 4 product groups.
  Countries that export products with relatively more technological content have a rate of economic growth that would not otherwise be possible.
  Such a positive result can mainly be provided by scientific and technical progress and the effect of scale, the country can use new, more efficient production techniques or benefit from deep specialization in any field.
  If so, then why are some developing countries not developing their manufacturing sector at all?
  A possible answer to this question could be that the country must be "relatively developed" in order to be able to maximize profits from the export of finished products, different sectors of the country's economy must be developed, such as 67 ECONOMICS education, investment, trade, as well as developed infrastructure , labor market, etc.
 There are other additional positive factors of export.
 For example, Emery cites three factors: increased foreign exchange availability, increased efficiency, and scale effect.
  According to another view, scientific and technical progress is an additional positive factor for exports.
  Moreover, Edwards argued that this scientific and technical advancement, in turn, could lead to the creation of more efficient commodity management mechanisms for the exported goods sector and the use of improved production techniques as opposed to the non-exported sector.
  All this, in turn, leads to innovation and production expansion in each sector, thus increasing revenues and leading to economic growth.
  Another positive factor in exports is the increase in a country's competitiveness in the international market, including the scale effect, growing innovation, and educational growth, all of which contribute to economic growth.
 In order to boost Armenia's exports, the most important task is to stimulate the activities of producers who can be competitive in the international market and become a country exporting finished products from a country that exports natural resources and labor.
  In this regard, the state settlement of the problem is important: in-depth study of the potential of companies, provision of transfers to prospective producers, state support for the necessary information, as well as raising the level of science and education, which will fill the labor market with in-demand and skilled workers.
  It is especially important to ensure the involvement of small and medium-sized businesses in foreign trade engagement and to develop a specific guidance policy in this regard.
 It is also necessary to provide a perspective system of preferential lending to organizations, to establish a connection between foreign direct investment and the establishment of optimal links between local organizations and the implementation of business angels' investments.
  Today the concentration of export products and markets is high, investments are low in potential export sectors, the level of development of export logistics services, as well as export credit and insurance services is low, the opportunities provided by the EEU and the EU are not fully used.
  The state should stimulate the export of finished products through tax and customs policies, so that the export of higher value-added goods instead of raw materials and semi-finished products increases.
  It is necessary to hold discussions with logistics organizations to support the presentation of products of Armenian small and medium enterprises and to use export opportunities.
 In case of a difficult geopolitical situation created for Armenia, it is very important to establish mutually beneficial economic relations and consistent development with as many countries as possible.
  It is also necessary to continue working with Iran to form a free economic zone.
 .
