The principles of public administration around the world are changing along with the development of technology.
  They relate both to the policy pursued and to the principles of communication and the nature of the relationship.
  Technologies have introduced new principles of cooperation and partnership in public administration in the relationship between local self-government and territorial governance systems, civil society organizations 211 GOVERNANCE, as well as private and public institutions.
  Online platforms provide a fairly wide range of functions, some of which can be successfully used beyond the boundaries of administrative units, regions or communities.
  In other words, the use of technology in public administration can contribute to the introduction of a management system that does not impose administrative boundaries and is implemented on a territorial basis.
 This can be especially effective in the case of problematic administrative divisions (such as the one in the Republic of Armenia, according to numerous publications), when the scope of powers is not specified or the system is under reform.
 A number of important events that have taken place or are taking place in Armenia in recent years, in particular, the enlargement of communities, the transition to a parliamentary system of government, large-scale changes initiated by the Velvet Events of 2018, as well as the state of emergency caused by COVID 19 show that the application of spatial governance principles with the introduction of technological tools that reduce the role of governance due to administrative delimitation can ensure greater efficiency between centralized, territorial and decentralized governing bodies and other entities.
 In the context of the implementation of management functions, the use of electronic platforms (Digital Social Innovation-DSI) is widespread, which provide "smart" procedures for spatial planning, policy-making through cooperation, participatory decision-making and generally solutions involving spatial factors [1, p. 14].
  Through such platforms, a number of functions can be performed in the public administration system of the Republic of Armenia, which are reserved for the territorial administration and local self-government bodies.
  Thus, 212 GOVERNMENT OF THE ECONOMY The scope of powers of the regional governor in the field of development, according to the RA Law on Territorial Administration adopted in 2019, includes the development and monitoring of the regional development strategy [2, Article 20], which assumes planning, policy development, participatory management and other processes.
  They can be implemented by covering areas outside the administrative boundaries of the region, based on spatial principles and electronic tools.
  Moreover, if the development of the strategy is limited to the administrative boundary of the region, it may hinder the efficient use of resources or development on a cluster basis.
 And in the system of local self-government the possibilities of applying the above-mentioned principles and tools are great within the framework of inter-community cooperation.
  The community council may decide to form inter-community associations, as well as submit a proposal to the state authorized body to unite with other communities to form a new community [3, Article 16].
  In the case of different formats of inter-community cooperation, the communities again act within the scope of their powers reserved by law, but their activities go beyond their administrative boundaries as a settlement.
  This can be done mainly in terms of administration, spatial planning, strategy development, provision of a number of services to the population and other powers, which are mentioned in the concept of community enlargement and formation of inter-community associations [4, p. 46].
  In essence, a number of territorial and local government powers can be exercised on the basis of electronic tools and networking principles, outside the administrative boundaries of a region or community, within territorial boundaries.
 The use of electronic platforms in management systems requires the use of a large digital database, as effective planning, policy development, and electronic decision-making require the collection and processing of large amounts of information.
  This is especially important in the context of multilevel governance systems, the multifaceted activities that take place within them, and the many actors involved.
  To ensure such processes, it is necessary to set clear standards of knowledge, which means that if electronic platforms are used in the public administration system, knowledge-based and research-based decision-making becomes inevitable.
  That is, the decision-makers, the members of the society and the representatives of the local self-government and territorial administration bodies, must possess the relevant knowledge and technologies.
  In this regard, attention should be paid to the fact that information and communication technologies are significant factors influencing spatial change [5, p. 3].
  And since the spatial changes are related to planning, strategy development, public participation, joint administration and other factors of public administration, we think it is possible to introduce a spatial management system in Armenia that will ensure the principles of technology, management functions, resources and decision-making principles. effective cooperation.
 The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development recognizes Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) as a key driver of global prosperity [6, p. 2].
  In this context, it should be noted that the initiatives, which are formed on the principles of GTN management, focus on local capacity development in terms of technology absorption [7, p. 30].
  That is, on the one hand, prosperity presupposes the introduction of scientific and technological innovations, on the other hand, these investments can be more effective in the field of governance with the participation of 214 years of local government.
  Therefore, the thesis that the factor of knowledge and technologies is necessary at the local level of public administration is strengthened, and the existence of these factors allows to introduce principles of spatial development.
 Taking into account the above-mentioned circumstances, we propose to introduce spatial management principles in the RA public administration system, which should include: Տարածք An area formed by cluster principles, where public, private and public structures can establish cooperation and partnership.
 Շրջանակ A framework of participatory actions, where optimal decisions can be made by the residents of a certain area, regardless of the fact that they are within the administrative boundaries of a community or region.
 Հավաք Collection and development of a database on public institutions, private companies and non-governmental organizations with the introduction of information and communication technologies, which can be used for strategic optimal planning of a certain area without administrative boundaries.
 Իրական Implementation of territorial governance and local self-government functions that can be provided through electronic tools outside the administrative boundaries of the region or community, without reducing efficiency.
 The implementation of the above-mentioned steps will enable to provide innovative approaches to public modernization at the spatial level, going beyond the administrative boundaries of the region or community.
  Such modernization approaches are urgent especially in the context of the problems of the administrative-territorial division of the RA regions, the controversial results of the enlargement of the communities and the situation created due to the COVID-19 epidemic.
  However, it is clear that this model of governance envisages not only the exercise of the powers of territorial administration and local self-government bodies at the spatial level, but also a wider scope of technology application, knowledge input, information processing and public participation.
 Studies have shown that from the whole list of powers of both territorial administration and local self-government, it is possible to separate such functions that can be performed by spatial principles, going beyond the regional or community administrative territories and introducing principles of spatial development.
  This can be achieved through electronic management platforms and tools, where research and knowledge-based decision-making are crucial.
  The introduction of spatial principles and electronic tools in the management system will also have a positive impact on increasing public participation in decision-making.
  These processes will contribute to the modernization of the public administration system at the local and regional levels of the Republic of Armenia through technological innovations, ensuring public participation, publicity, transparency and accountability.
 .
