The secularism of education today is perceived by many as the exclusion of the influence or involvement of the church in the education system, which in our opinion is not a correct definition.
 Of course, the secularism of education, as an important component of the concept of a secular state, is interrelated with religious education.
  At the heart of this interconnectedness is the idea that the secularism of education and religious education are not opposite poles, but complementary and interdependent factors.
  However, these concepts become incompatible when the teaching of religious education takes place in public educational institutions.
 232 PEDAGOGY In order to fully understand the principle of secular education, it is necessary to consider the relevant international legal acts and to examine the experience of some foreign countries.
 Thus, the UN "Universal Declaration of Human Rights" confirms: "Education should promote mutual understanding, tolerance and friendship between all peoples, racial and religious groups ..." [1].
  These provisions of the Declaration allow the general history of religion and ethics to be taught in public schools if it is conducted impartially and objectively.
 In addition, the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights states that "... States Parties undertake to respect the freedom of parents and, where appropriate, legal guardians, to ensure the religious and moral upbringing of their children in accordance with their own beliefs."
 And Article 14 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child provides: "States Parties respect the right of the child to freedom of thought, conscience and religion.
  States Parties shall respect the responsibilities of parents and, where appropriate, legal guardians, in the exercise of their rights in a manner consistent with the development of the child in accordance with his or her developing abilities ...
  Article 29 of the same Convention states: that "the education of the child must be directed to ... c) the upbringing of the child's parents, their cultural originality, language and values, the national values ​​of the child's country of residence, the country of his origin and different civilizations from his own civilization" [3].
 At the same time, the UN Framework Convention for the Protection of the Rights of National Minorities states that "Parties shall promote tolerance and dialogue between cultures and shall take effective steps between all persons living in their territories, regardless of their ethnic, cultural, linguistic or religious origin." to promote mutual respect, understanding and cooperation, in particular in the fields of education, culture and the media. ”[4]
 Thus, it becomes clear that international law does not impose any obstacles to religious education in the education system, if it is based on tolerance, respect for national identity, impartiality, objectivity and other principles.
 As for the issue of teaching the subject of religious orientation in educational institutions of foreign countries, it should be noted that it is solved in different ways.
  Religious education can be allowed both in private institutions belonging to religious organizations and in state educational complexes.
  There is an opposite approach to this, when religious education is generally banned in the state education system.
  In other words, the subject of religious instruction is taught in the public schools of some countries, but the teaching of the subject of religion in the public schools of some countries is simply forbidden.
  For example, such a ban has been imposed in China, Japan, and Mongolia20, where the educational process is largely based on morality, national customs, and morals.
 At the same time, there are countries where religious education is included in the main curricula within the framework of compulsory education programs, in particular, Germany, Turkey, Austria and Cyprus.
  The subject "Fundamentals of Islam" is taught in many countries of the Arab world, as well as in Chechnya, North Ossetia and elsewhere.
  Of course, there are countries where alternatives to religious education are provided in the form of moral and philosophical subjects, such as in Russia-Mongolia, although the law guarantees the dominant status of the Buddhist religion, religious education is prohibited in the general education system.
 234 TEACHING in Georgia, Italy, Finland, Belgium and Luxembourg.
  In Hungary, Latvia and Lithuania, the competent authorities make joint decisions with religious organizations on the specifics of religious education.
 In the context of the above, based on the results of the comparative analysis of the legislation regulating the secularism of the education sector in individual countries, the following considerations can be made: Thus, according to Article 24 of the Belgian Constitution. "Schools organized by state authorities provide a choice between teaching one of the recognized religions and non-religious morality until the end of compulsory schooling." [8]
 Religious education in Greece as a compulsory school subject is largely due to the historical influence and state status of the Greek Orthodox Church.
 However, it seems that parents who do not accept the religion of the state church have the opportunity to release their children from the mentioned courses.
 In Germany, as already mentioned, religious education is compulsory in schools.
  Moreover, Article 7, Clause 3 of the Basic Law stipulates that: "Religious education in public schools, except for non-religious schools, is a compulsory subject.
  Religious education is conducted in accordance with the principles of religious communities without prejudice to the right of state control.
  No teacher shall be obliged to conduct religious instruction against his will. ”[9]
  Moreover, the obligatory nature of the religious subject does not exclude the principle of volunteering.
  In particular, paragraph 2 of the same article stipulates the right of parents or legal representatives to decide on the issue of their child's religious upbringing.
  In addition to all this, it is noteworthy that in some German lands the possibility of choosing a religious subject is defined.
  In particular, the teaching of a religious subject in the 235 PEDAGOGICAL SCHOOLS in Berlin is optional, and the subject "Ethics", which has been taught since 2006, is already considered compulsory.
 Later, Kazakhstan, which is considered a secular state, also recognized the secular principle of education.
  Thus, according to Article 3, Part 4 of the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan "On Religious Activities and Religious Organizations". "The education and upbringing system of the Republic of Kazakhstan, with the exception of religious (religious) educational organizations, is separate from religion and religious associations and has a secular nature" 21 [12].
 Part 6 of Article 3 of the Federal Law on Education of the Russian Federation defines the secular nature of education in state and local self-government bodies carrying out educational activities 22 [13].
 There is a clear position on the issue under Article 40 of the Lithuanian Constitution, which also defines the secular nature of education: “Educational institutions of state and local self-government bodies are secular in nature.
  In these institutions, the "Law of God" is taught at the request of parents.
 In addition, in 2010 the subject "Fundamentals of Religion" was introduced in Kazakhstan on an optional basis (optional).
  According to the order of the Minister of Education and Science of the Republic of Kazakhstan, in 2016 the subject "Secularism and Fundamentals of Religion" was introduced in the 9th grade of secondary schools of Kazakhstan, the teaching of which was reserved only for specially trained history teachers.
 In 2012, the subject "Fundamentals of Religious Culture and Secular Ethics" was introduced in all secondary schools of the Russian Federation.
  The latter includes six modules with the option to choose one.
 These are: "Fundamentals of Orthodox Culture", "Fundamentals of Islamic Culture", "Fundamentals of Buddhist Culture", "Fundamentals of Jewish Culture", "Fundamentals of World Religious Cultures", "Fundamentals of Secular Ethics".
 236 TEACHING Of particular interest is Article 28 of the Indian Constitution, which provides for the freedom to attend religious instruction and to worship at certain educational institutions. "No religious instruction shall take place in an educational institution which is funded by the State. No one shall be compelled to attend or attend a religious service or to attend a state-funded educational institution if that person or "If he was a minor, his guardian did not give his consent." Article 24 of the Mexican Constitution further states that "freedom of religion is guaranteed, and the principles on which education is to be administered.
 In Italy, the state finances Catholic education.
  Each year, parents write a special letter informing them whether they want their child to attend a Catholic school or refuse to apply.
  In addition, religious instructors in Italy are appointed by the state based on a church guarantee that confirms the teacher's qualifications and training.
  Without this consent, the competent state body may deprive the teacher of that right [6 page 388].
  It is noteworthy that this approach is applicable in many countries.
 The issue of the use of religious symbols in state educational institutions is also problematic from the point of view of secular education.
  It should be noted that in this case, too, the states have adopted different approaches.
 237 PEDAGOGY For example, there are countries where religious clothing and other symbols are allowed to be worn in public schools according to their religious beliefs and traditions (Russia, Chechnya, Israel, Iran).
 At the same time, there are countries where it is forbidden for teachers or lecturers of educational institutions to wear religious symbols openly and for students to show their religious affiliation (in France, some parts of Germany, etc.).
 It is necessary to take into account the fact that the issue of the use of religious symbols is relevant especially in secular countries where Islam is traditionally considered an influential factor in the public consciousness (for example, Turkey, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan) 23 [5, pp. 321-322].
 Perhaps it is necessary to pay attention to the fact that the state intervention is in line with its legitimate goal.
 In this regard, it is noteworthy that the European Court of Human Rights, in a precedent case in the case of Leyla Sahin, upheld the legitimacy of the ban on wearing headscarves in Turkish educational institutions, based on the Turkish Republic's obligations to protect the rights and freedoms of others.
  Therefore, the ban on wearing headscarves in the context of conventional legislation can not. In 2008, the Justice and Development Party of the Republic of Turkey, together with two other parties, submitted a package of constitutional amendments to the Parliament to lift the ban on women and girls wearing headscarves in education and other state institutions.
  The issue of the constitutionality of this amendment to the Constitution was challenged in the Turkish Constitutional Court, as a result of which it was declared unconstitutional.
  This decision of the Turkish Constitutional Court, in fact, was based on the priority of ensuring the realization of the principle of secularism in a democratic society and defending its role.
 238 TEACHING considered illegal interference with the right to religious freedom.
 It should also be noted that the mere presence of religious symbols in secular educational institutions does not in itself predetermine the coercion or propaganda of this teaching for students.
  From this point of view, the controversial position of the Strasbourg court against Italy is valuable.
  The European Court initially found the presence of images of the cross in Italian public schools inadmissible as a violation of the applicant's right to raise his children in accordance with the atheist beliefs.
  This approach of the court caused a great wave of dissatisfaction in most European countries, including the Republic of Armenia.
  The Italian government complained that the symbol of the cross was not only a religious symbol but also a cultural symbol of national identity, an important component of the state's historical heritage, and that its ban could harm the religious sentiments of the majority of the population.
  As a result of the review of the verdict, the Grand Chamber of the Court took a diametrically opposite position, noting that the mentioned scenes cannot unequivocally predetermine the religious preferences of the children or their parents.
  We believe that the legal and moral value of this judgment is that in the current process of de-religiousization and exclusion of religion from the Christian consciousness, Europe, rooted in Christian values, remained true to its historical traditions and the prevailing liberal approaches to human rights did not run counter to public interests.
 Thus, as noted by individual states, in order to protect the principle of secularism, they may, within the limits of their discretion, prohibit the use of clothing and other items of religious significance [7, pp. 45-62].
 239 PEDAGOGY Without aiming to fully discuss the experience of different countries in the field of secular education, it is necessary to emphasize that there are no common approaches to the teaching of religion in public schools.
  In addition, religious education in secular schools is largely due to the influence of religion in the life of the state and society and the ideological strategy adopted by the state authorities.
 .
