The protection and protection of children's rights and legal interests are one of the most important state and legal issues nowadays.
 Children have always been the most vulnerable and defenseless class of any state and society.
  They are the basis for the progress and development of the state and society.
 However, it is a sad fact that in recent years the rights and legitimate interests of children have been violated more often.
  The issue of protection of children's rights is considered one of the most urgent topics for scientific coverage nowadays.
 Evidence of this is provided by the United Nations (UN), the International Labor Organization (ILO), the World Health Organization (WHO), and international non-governmental organizations for the protection of children's rights, according to which children in both developed and developing countries are still exposed to schools. psychological and physical violence, get involved in labor relations, and become a victim of trafficking.
  The study of this circumstance requires 123 JURISDICTION to develop clear mechanisms by states to ensure and protect the universally recognized rights of children.
 The topic is so relevant that, as it is known, the whole world values, defines and fixes the rights of children as weak, defenseless and vulnerable beings in the international relations, and the formation of a normal personality of a child as a full member of society depends on the protection of family interests. They are being violated in the country as well, which contributes to the fact that the protection of the interests of the family and the child has become one of the most important international issues.
 Historically, both the heads of state and the people have always realized the well-known fact that a healthy family is the most important guarantee of the state's power, and the realization of the rights and interests of the child can be ensured in the conditions of a healthy family.
  And finally, the topic is relevant, as crimes against the interests of the family and the child are among the most common crimes in the world.
 As we mentioned, the protection of the special rights of the child is conditioned by the vulnerable nature of the child, therefore it is necessary to provide additional guarantees both at the international and domestic level.
  The issue becomes deeper when children find themselves in the status of an offender or a victim in court proceedings [1, p. 2].
 The aim of the study is to prove the urgency of the issue of children's rights and to study international mechanisms for the protection of children's rights.
 And in fact, the issue under discussion concerns all states, regardless of their form, the solution of the problem of protection of children's rights should be of interest to the world community.
  And this is due to the objective reason that children do not have the opportunity to defend their rights on their own and, unlike adults, they need additional protection.
  On this issue, VS Ovchinski rightly states: "... the measures taken by individual states can not be enough.
  It is necessary to have a joint approach of all stakeholders for the protection of children's rights "[2, p. 733].
 The above-mentioned facts contributed to the establishment of the Institute for International Protection of Children's Rights.
 The issue of international protection of children's rights was seriously discussed at the beginning of the 20th century, long before the formation of the United Nations.
 The need to establish an institute was discussed at the International Congress for the Protection of Children, held July 23-26, 1913 in Brussels, during which the child was recognized as a creature in need of special care and care.
 Representatives of 40 states participated in the work of the Congress [3, p. 117].
 According to Professor J. Badalyants, the Institute for International Protection of the Rights of the Child is a set of international legal principles and norms defining the rights and freedoms of children, which define the obligations of the state to ensure and implement them [4, p. 250].
 The protection of the rights of the child is carried out both through international legal documents dedicated to human rights and through special documents dedicated to the protection of the rights of the child.
  These are: Համ The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) միջազգային International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966) միջազգային International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1966) Եվրոպ European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (1950) [5] 125 JURISDICTION 1989 It was adopted by the United Nations on November 20, 1990, and on September 2, 1990, a special international document on the protection of the rights of the child entered into force, the first international imperative act dedicated to the protection of the rights of the child, the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Convention ”[6].
 The preamble to the Convention states in particular that the child needs special protection and care, including adequate legal protection, both before and after birth.
 At the same time, the declaration mentions the introduction of previously adopted documents, in particular, the 1924 Geneva Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to address the issue of ensuring the well-being of children.
  The provisions that were only mentioned in the previous legal acts are significantly elaborated in the 1959 declaration1.
  Such a provision is an example that the child by law and other means should be provided with special protection and favorable conditions that will ensure the physical, mental, moral development of the child in the conditions of free social relations.
 The Convention has three optional protocols: the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child: child trafficking, child prostitution and child pornography, the Optional Protocol on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict and the Optional Protocol on Communication.
 The latter are considered key normative legal acts, which regulate the issues of children's rights and form a multifunctional legal framework for the protection of children, which is applicable in any case and in the case of each child.
  Emphasizing and modernizing the protection of children's rights in 1989, the 1924 Convention on the Rights of the Child is not an "ideal" international legal instrument in terms of the rules of legal technology, as it did not enshrine the term "child".
 126 JURISDICTION International treaties were concluded.
  At the same time, on November 20, 1989, on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of the Rights of the Child, the UN General Assembly unanimously adopted the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
 In 1996, on the initiative of France, November 20 was declared World Children's Day.
 The convention unified the concept of "child" as each person reaching the age of 18.
  Thus, for the first time, the convention stipulates the upper age limit for a child - 18 years old.
 But more. It did not contain any explanation of the late UN Standard on the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty on the 18-year-old age [7 page 88].
 According to YG Azarova, the international protection of children's rights is mainly regulated by universal human rights principles and special legal principles.
  These principles, as the author rightly considers, are considered as a legal basis on which a certain procedure for the protection of children's rights is based, and it is especially important for each country to ensure the application of the same principles enshrined in the Convention in domestic law [8 page 65].
 I also consider it necessary to refer to the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice of 1985, which were adopted in the form of a resolution of the UN General Assembly.
  The purpose of the Beijing Rules is to protect all juvenile offenders who, for one reason or another, have appeared in the justice system.
 Examining the international mechanisms for the protection of children's rights, we consider it necessary to refer to the practice of the European Court of Human Rights in the protection of children's rights.
 The European Court of Human Rights upholds the rights enshrined in the Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
 As for the protection of family rights, we can say that children in particular can not defend their rights on their own, and the legal representatives of the child are sometimes violators of his rights, therefore, in the practice of the European Court of Human Rights the issue of protection of children's rights becomes especially relevant.
  Among a number of precedent decisions of the ECHR, we will single out the precedent decision on granting asylum to children and their parents in the case of "Mus-Hajiyeva and others v. Belgium".
  The applicant, a Chechen woman, fled Grozny with her four children and arrived in Belgium seeking asylum.
  However, due to the fact that Poland is a country joining the European Union, they were ordered to leave Belgium.
 The family was detained in Belgium before the order was carried out.
  The European Court especially emphasized the fact that the children were together with the mother during this month.
  In earlier rulings, the European Court of Justice had ruled that the special vulnerability of children should be taken into account, and then the illegality of being a foreigner in a foreign country (Mubilanzula Mayeca and Kanik Mitunga v. Belgium).
  Therefore, given that the children had been in a closed area not adapted for children for one month, as well as the fact that the doctors had found symptoms of psychological trauma in the children, taking into account their age, the length of detention was recognized by the Court as Article 3 of the Convention. violation of the article and compensated the injured party 17 thousand euros [9].
 Thus, it becomes obvious that children always need the comprehensive care and support of the state and society.
 The analysis of the developed international legal mechanisms and the case law of the ECHR show that the topic is topical and should always be in the focus of the international community's 128 JURISDICTION to ensure not only the theoretical analysis related to the topic, but also practical and legal application.
  The importance of the subject is emphasized in the words of the famous 20th century thinker Maria Montessori: “The child is the reproduction of the adult, who manages it as if the child were a part of his property.
  A slave has never belonged to his master as a child to his parents. ”
 .
