The service market is divided into many segments, which differ from each other in financial, social, demographic, national and other characteristics.
  Taking into account the listed factors, it becomes possible to make sound forecasts on the market demand for services and its development trends.
 Education and healthcare have been the two state sub-sectors of services that have been relatively stable since the independence of the Republic of Armenia.
  However, in our region, Armenia has appeared in the list of countries with the lowest educational expenditures in the region, and in recent years there has been no increase in educational expenditures in the state budget (see Table 1).
 The same trend is observed in the share of educational services in GDP (see Figure 1.), while the average share of educational services in developed Western European countries is close to 5% of GDP.
 Table 1. Dynamics of education expenditures in the RA state budget (million drams) 1 Indicators Budget expenditures, including Education Specific share of educational expenditures (%) 2011 106085.0 2013 103094.5 2016 RA Law on State Budget, 2011, 2013, 2016.
 210 ECONOMICS Figure 1. Share of public funding for education and educational services in GDP 2 General education is mostly financed in Armenia at the expense of state funds (see Figure 2), and secondary, especially higher professional education is mainly organized at the expense of private resources.
  Thus, the share of state-funded students in RA state universities is about 24%.
 Figure 2 Structure of expenditures for the provision of educational services through public funds in the RA 2016 state budget 3 NSS official website, //armstat.am RA law on the 2016 state budget.
 211 ECONOMICS Studies show that educational services in the country have different levels of development not only by sectors, but also by places of delivery.
 The RA services market currently has the following special features, which give rise to a number of proposals for the improvement of the sector. First, the volume of educational services provided in the regions and in the capital of the republic needs to be leveled, as about 78% of the provided professional educational services are concentrated in the city of Yerevan, where more than half of the population of the republic does not live.
 Second, the structure of educational services provided in the country needs to be reformed according to the nature of funding.
  Currently, the types of services based on private tuition fees are developing, while it is time to pay serious attention to expanding the scope of educational services that require public resources and state financial control.
 And finally, the spheres of educational services, which are more competitive in the international market and in case of having the necessary quality, can even be exported from the republic, need rapid development.
 Currently, the export of educational services is given serious attention in developed countries, where the majority of students are foreigners.
  This process is especially evident in the United States, Germany, the Nordic countries, and France (see Table 2).
  And now China is striving to become the leader, making serious investments in the field of education for foreign students.
 212 ECONOMICS Table 2 Distribution of Overseas Students in Exporting Countries Exporting Services 4 Countries United Kingdom France Australia Australia Germany China Canada Japan Russia Other Countries Total Percentage of Number of Overseas Students Percent Percentage (%) The processes in Armenia are still passive and no significant growth tendencies of foreign students are registered.
  Moreover, if they come to study from abroad, they are mainly Diaspora Armenians from the Russian Federation and Georgia.
  Such a situation gives reason to ponder why there is no tendency for the growth of foreign students in a country that offers relatively low tuition fees.
 There are many reasons, but the most important of them is to ensure the quality of education.
 The quality of education directly depends on full funding.
  Developing new financial practices is an important factor in being successful in the market.
  The correct use of state funds and the involvement of additional financial resources will be a great impetus in regulating the economic issues of the education system.
 Given the large size of the problem, it can not be considered fully resolved yet.
  It is especially noticeable during budget discussions for vocational education.
  After determining the number of students on a free basis, the amount needed to organize their education is calculated.
 The changes in the demand for the quality of higher education are conditioned by a number of main actions.
  The following can be distinguished from these factors: 1. Demographic trends, 2. Demand for labor, 3. Living standards of the population, social inequality, 4. Education levels and national traditions of the population, 5. Conformity of the quality of education with international standards, 6. Public spending policy in the field of higher education.
 Education can be seen as a deferred investment.
  Public contributions include public expenditures such as school services and other tuition fees.
  Even after including these costs, the social compensation is higher, but it takes years for the social compensation to appear.
 As for the increase in the number of people receiving higher education due to the demand in the labor market, we can not expect an increase in the next 5 years, given the level of employment of professionals with higher education, which for the urban population in 2016. was about 28%.
 In the future, the policy of the state as one of the largest houses 214 ECONOMICS will also have a significant impact on the demand of the labor market.
  Currently, it is worrying that there is a low level of salary in a number of professions, particularly in those areas where the state is the main employer.
  On the other hand, a number of measures need to be taken to ensure the growth of labor market relations. Զարգ Development of career centers in all state universities in parallel with the optimization process;, In parallel with the process of optimization of universities, creation of internal rating structures, elaboration of reliable information requirements, publication of information, development of standards of professional knowledge and skills.
 As for the growth of professional educational services in the future, it will be primarily connected with the maintenance of the number of graduates of general education and the relative growth of the number of those who continue their education after high school.
  Such expectations are substantiated both by the development of the country's economy and by the continuous policy of stability of public spending on general education.
 .
