The problems related to the educational process in RA universities are various and obvious.
  Existing problems in educational institutions lead to a lack of professional internships for students, which is the reason for the high level of unemployment after graduation.
  According to Article [1], one year after graduating from university in Armenia, 42% of students remain unemployed (see Figure 1).
 Figure 1 shows that more than 40% of university graduates in the Republic of Armenia are not able to find employment in their specialties [2].
  Surveys conducted at HEIs indicate that the knowledge gained is not up-to-date (see Table 1), in other words, questions asked during interviews related to practical knowledge are deadlocked.
 Figure 1.
  Unemployment rate of university graduates one year after graduation (%) (2018-2019) The problem is of course a priority, and requires an urgent and effective solution.
  In order to find out the source of the problem, surveys were conducted in RA universities.
  The survey involved 85 graduates of different universities with bachelor's degree programs.
  At first, the issues that arose during the job interviews were discussed, and then the options for gaining practical knowledge during the study.
  It became clear that during the educational process, non-modern, outdated methods were used in the universities: course, group and individual work.
 See Table 1 for detailed information about the survey.
 Table 1 Results of the survey conducted in the universities operating in the Republic of Armenia University Satisfied Dissatisfied with the plan from the plan YSU 3 YSMU 4 ASUE 5 EC 11 AUA 185 MANAGEMENT YSU  Yerevan State University YSMU  Yerevan State Medical University ASUE  Armenian State University of Economics EC  European University AUA  American University in Armenia The presented figures and facts confirm that has a new approach and a new model, because by not using the theoretical knowledge gained during the lesson, in practice students lose the opportunity to become market-required professionals, wasting money, time and energy.
  The schematic presentation of the model currently operating in RA HEIs is presented in Figure 2.
 1. Lesson process 2. Incorrect processing of the received information 3. Transfer of memorized information for the exam to the lecturer 4. University graduate without practical experience and knowledge Figure 2.
  The educational process in RA HEIs As can be seen from Figure 2, the educational process in RA is organized in 4 main stages: 186 MANAGEMENT 1. Lesson process 2. Incorrect processing of information received during the lesson process, ie the student gaining relevant knowledge, only theoretical application Because of this he does not fully comprehend and assimilate the necessary amount.
 3. Transfer of memorized information for exams to the lecturer.
  At this stage, the biggest shortcoming of the university education becomes especially obvious - to prepare the student for the exam, instead of giving practical knowledge and experience.
 4. University graduate without practical experience and knowledge.
  Due to the incompleteness and imperfection of the previous stages, the university graduates, not having the appropriate knowledge and experience, are not able to find a professional job, with the ensuing consequences.
 Thus, analyzing in detail, we are convinced that there is a need to include a new educational model, which will provide the student with practical knowledge and experience during the lesson.
  Thus, the main advantage of the model developed by us lies in the strong student-lecturer-university-employer relationship.
  International experience shows [3] that a well-organized group work is an effective way of working, but as already mentioned, it should be organized at the university level.
  Special professional groups should be separated from students in universities: economists, linguists, managers, programmers, etc.
  The university has special agreements with employers, taking tasks in accordance with the knowledge of each group, distributes them among the groups, receiving money from the task, a part of which should be transferred to the group lecturer, and students receive discounts and incentives from the university.
 Thus, we have a mutually beneficial cooperation between the student, the lecturer, the university and the employer.
  What is presented is the new model we propose to provide students with internships during the course.
  For a schematic representation of the model, see Figure 3.
 1. Lesson 6. Relevant Market Alumni 2. Team Recruitment 5. Professional Development 3. Selection of Lead Lecturers 4. Practical Tasks Figure 3. Proposed New Learning Model Acquire professional internships for students while studying, as well as receive discounts and incentives depending on the amount and quality of work done.
  One of the features of this model is the possibility of additional salary of a lecturer and getting a higher qualification.
  The university, in its turn, contacts the employers, and in case of the right work, it is possible to raise its own rating, which is a very important indicator for the universities.
 188 MANAGEMENT Conclusion This article presents a new model of the education system, the main purpose of which is to provide students with relevant professional practice in parallel with the learning process.
  The main idea is to create working groups of students, for which the university will find paid assignments, and some of the lecturers will become the leaders of the created groups, leading the students to the correct completion of the tasks.
  The presented model is mutually beneficial for all parties: student, lecturer, university, employer.
 .
