Based on the provisions of the Eurasian Economic Community, the integration processes within the EEU provide for the development of sectors of the economy, the creation of new economic environments and new prospects for development, the expansion of markets where import and export tariffs will not be applied in non-tariffs. Measures, contraindications 31 ECONOMICS ping and compensation measures [14].
  To get the real picture, let us present the advantages and disadvantages of the EEU, pointing out a number of arguments.
 First of all, it should be noted that the creation of the EEU, as well as the CIS, pursues a mostly political goal.
  Russia is trying to restore its dominance during the Soviet years.
  Russia, as always, seeks its political interests in Armenia.
  On the one hand, Armenia is an irreplaceable military base for Russia, on the other hand, Armenia is at an important crossroads. the crossroads through which Iranian oil and gas can reach Europe.
  Thus, Russia, by Armenia's membership in the EEU, blocks Iran's opportunity, which would mean the loss of billions of dollars as a result of the reduction of Russian gas exports to Europe.
  The EEU cannot solve the problem of economic backwardness of the member states, if we take into account that the major poles of economic development and technological progress are the USA, Japan and the developed European countries.
  Therefore, if Armenia does not develop economic cooperation relations with these countries, it will refrain from global development processes and technical progress.
  In this sense, there is a presumption according to which the development of Armenia's economic relations with the European Union (EU) has more serious preconditions and prospects.
 Armenia's economic relations with the EEU member states are more established in trade relations, if not limited to the framework of trade liberalization policy.
 The positive side or advantage of Armenia's membership in the EEU is the provision of trade opportunities with the creation of a privileged (common) customs area.
  In order to substantiate or deny this fact, the statistical indicators of the RA foreign trade of the last five years have been studied.
 32 ECONOMICS Table 1 Armenia's foreign trade turnover with EEU and EU countries (million dollars) [6, pp. 114-115], [7, pp. 124-125] EEU countries, including Russia January growth rate Belarus 40,1 39,3 36 , 7 46,1 50,3 109.1 31,3 Kazakhstan 7,5 5,1 5,6 9,0 13,5 150.0 3,3 Kyrgyzstan The study of trade dynamics allows us to say that both within the EEU and Armenia's foreign trade with EU countries in 2016-2019 It mainly had growth tendencies.
  As of the end of 2018, a significant increase was registered in Armenia-Kazakhstan trade relations.
  The increase was due to an almost twofold increase in exports ($ 9.8 million, compared to $ 4.9 million last year).
 The main product exported to Armenia is alcoholic beverages, which should be understood mainly as brandy.
 Armenia's trade turnover with the EU had higher growth rates (119.0%) than with the EEU countries (111.3%).
 However, in 2019 In the first half of 2018, compared to the same indicators of the previous period, the growth rates of the index were relatively low in the EEU-Armenia part, and in the EU countries, the trade volumes decreased by 16.6% (in the first half of 2018 the index made $ 906.8 million).
 At the same time, a decline was registered in both the import and export 33 ECONOMICS structure.
  Exports fell 26% (from $ 369.6 million to $ 273.2 million) and imports fell 1.1% (from $ 537.1 million to $ 483.1 million).
 The study of the structure of the trade turnover of the Republic of Armenia shows that the main direction is the EEU, which in 2019. It had a growth tendency in the first half of the year.
 2019 Part I EEU EU Chart 1. Dynamics of the structure of Armenia's foreign trade (percentage) In 2017-2018, both exports and imports had a dynamic development.
 Exports Import Figure 2. Armenia's foreign trade with EEU countries (million dollars) 34 ECONOMICS Exports Import Figure 3. Armenia's foreign trade with EU countries (million dollars) Imports from EEU countries are almost twice as high as exports.
  The comparison of indicators allows us to say that the import was more from the EEU than from the EU, at the same time we exported more to the EU than the EEU, although in 2018. Exports to the EEU ($ 689 million), which increased by 20% compared to the previous year, exceeded the index of exports to the EU ($ 684 million).
  This fact is conditioned by the improvement of trade incentives and mechanisms between the countries of the union.
  It is noteworthy that the majority of exports, 97% of $ 684 million ($ 666.5 million) belong to the Russian market.
 The positive trend for the observed period in terms of exports to EU countries is obvious.
 2016-2018 The index increased 1.4 times (from 479 million dollars to 684 million dollars).
  However, in 2019 In January-June, compared to the previous period, the index decreased by 26% in terms of exports (from $ 370 million to $ 273 million), and in terms of imports decreased by 10% (from $ 537 million to $ 483 million).
 One of the important preconditions of European economic cooperation is the generalized "GSP +" system of EU Privileges, due to which 6300 Armenian goods are exported to the EU without customs duties.
  This circumstance explains the relatively high level of exports to the European market.
 35 ECONOMICS In the last two reporting years, the list of goods exported from Armenia is again dominated by raw materials and finished products [10].
  Armenia mostly exports alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages to Russia, 94% of which are alcoholic beverages, mainly brandy and vodka [11, p. 27].
  In this sense, the advantage of EEU integration is often identified with the creation of mechanisms for the export of Armenian alcoholic beverages to Russia on preferential terms.
 Except for Russia, all economic relations with the rest of the EEU countries are at a very low level of development at the present stage.
 The EEU exports mineral and fuel products and imports finished technological products, which proves the low and uncompetitive level of the EEU industrial potential [12].
 It is clear that there are a number of internal and external obstacles to the formation and full integration of the full market. On the one hand, it is the geographical location of Armenia, the difficulties of road and transport transportation and the economic blockade, on the other hand, there is still the problem of bringing it in line with European standards.
  In addition, international economic transactions are currently bypassing large investment projects.
 It should be taken into account that Armenia is in a low position among the post-Soviet countries in terms of foreign direct investment.
  In 2017, for five years, the index had only a downward trend, amounting to $ 246 million [3, p. 187].
 Examining the distribution of investments by sectors of the economy, we will see that the largest share of Russian investments is concentrated in the energy sector, particularly in the production of electricity, but the main direction in the geographical structure of investment flows in recent years remains 36 offshore countries [5, pp. 515-522].
  Thus, it can be stated once again that this level of regional economic cooperation is still very low in terms of having a positive impact on the real sector of the Armenian economy.
 If we want to strengthen the national economy, then with the economic thinking of the 21st century, we must develop the scientific fields, that is, think about how to secure our place in the world market of information technologies.
  Although the advantage of the EEU lies in the promotion of foreign trade, when domestic goods are exported to the markets of member countries on a preferential basis, without customs duties, thus becoming competitive, at the same time Armenia imports cheaper, ie without customs duties, yet with only four countries duty free The policy of developing trade, to put it mildly, is ineffective and unpromising, especially when exports are dominated by mineral and metal resources and agricultural products.
  Growth of mutual trade in industrial goods in 2017 The growth of food and agricultural exports was 23.7%, which is 57.6% of the total export [1, p. 54].
 The study of the structure of financial flows and trade turnover between the EEU country allows us to assert that there is still no serious prospect of advanced experience, the inflow of innovative technologies and the import and export of scientific products.
 Such trade tendencies mean lagging behind the pace of scientific and technical progress.
 Membership in the EEU, within the framework of a common trade policy, deprives member states of some independence in making economic decisions.
 Western sanctions against Russia have a dual effect on the Eurasian Economic Union member states.
  It is known that as a result of the sanctions, the Russian ruble is depreciating, and the prices of 37 ECONOMICS oil are decreasing.
  As a result, trade with Russia is reduced.
  At the same time, sanctions can have a positive effect on foreign trade in the sense that the replacement of prohibited goods in Russia with goods imported from the member states of the Union leads to an improvement in the trade balances of those countries.
 There are contradictions between the trade agreements within the EEU and the EU Association Agreement, as each of them presupposes different legal regimes.
 The EEU legislation stipulates that the relations between any member state of the Union and other integration structures should be regulated by the decisions of the Eurasian Economic Commission.
  The preferential trade regime established by trade agreements with European countries is under attack.
 The differences in the capacity of the markets must also be taken into account. The EU has a market with a population of 512 million, the EEU - 183 million.
  The difference in the size of the economy is bigger. In terms of gross domestic product, the EU is 8.5 times larger than the EEU.
  2017 The EU's GDP was $ 17 trillion, and the EEU's GDP was $ 2 trillion.
 Summarizing the studies, it should be noted a number of positive and negative aspects of regional integration processes, which stem from the requirements of the EEU structure and the EU Association Agreement.
 1. In the framework of EEU-Armenia trade and economic cooperation, Russia still remains not only the main partner, but also almost the only country, especially against the background of the lack of economic ties with Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan.
 2. Armenia's accession to the EEU promotes the sale of a number of goods, especially traditional goods (agricultural products, including brandy) in Russia.
 3. The economic component of EEU-Armenia integration is conditional and to some extent formal.
 38 ECONOMICS 4. The level of Armenia's economic cooperation with EU countries is at a very low level, which directly indicates Armenia's isolation from the Western world with a developed economy.
 5. The positive effect of the economic component is not tangible in the EU Association Agreement, instead the imposition of European norms disguised as human rights is obvious, which contradicts our national value system.
 6. Economic rapprochement with the EU can provide real incentives for the development of the Armenian economy at the expense of investments and knowledge-based spheres.
 7. Strengthening trade relations with the EU depends on the level of European standardization.
 Based on the above-mentioned protocols, let us point out some conditions for improving Armenia's integration ties: 1. Armenia should develop economic relations where there is partnership, and not exploitation, where the effect of cooperation will work, in other words, the industrial chain will be in the cooperating countries. Each of the countries will benefit.
 2. The development of the economy at the expense of the IT sector must become one of our priorities.
  After all, as a result of the exchange of experience, the opportunities and prospects for mastering advanced technologies are more in the realm of European integration.
 3. Prospects for European integration should not be limited to improving trade relations.
  The vital question is what kind of advanced experience we will gain as a result of integration, how we will use the opportunities provided by that integration to develop our economy, what joint initiatives we will come up with, what productive cooperatives we will enter, how we will use the EU 39 ECONOMICS theory development programs. from investments, etc.
 4. Cooperation relations should be deepened as much as possible only in the economic field, and in the political field, migration obligations and human rights protection commitments, it is necessary to show extreme caution, if necessary, a negative position.
  Europe should not be the center from which the institutional units regulating the social and political life of our nation will be governed, or Europe should not be seen as a moral and legal norm, agenda and culture, but Europe should be just an opportunity for us to enter a free market. to develop our economy and strengthen our country's position in the Western business world.
 And without economic strengthening, the pressure on this or that country and the neglect of our interests in the region will continue.
 5. Mining investment programs should not be given priority, instead the idea of ​​ensuring green economy growth and alternative energy production should be given priority.
 And finally, Armenia's national and economic security and development problems will not be solved by economic, trade unions or association agreements, will not be solved by enjoying the patronage of this or that country, nor will they be solved by assuming the role of economic attachés, cheap labor suppliers or their own strategic plans. by signing the documents adopted for implementation.
  Before signing agreements, treaties, memoranda, protocols, it is necessary to first create a solid package of state and national programs, in which the strategic program of economic development should have a special place.
  It should answer the following questions: "What do we want from the world as a nation, what will we give to the world, how will we become stronger, what will be our weight and what is the role of our country in this complex geopolitical 40 ECONOMICS in the context of conflicts and conflicts of interest. "
  As long as we do not have a national vision, any integration will sooner or later turn into a serious threat to national security.
  In the matter of rapprochement with this or that integration unit, our economic-political orientations and agenda issues should be the pursuit of our political interests, including the provision of territorial integrity and the diplomacy to resolve the obstacles in our way in our favor.
  Otherwise, the lack of worldview will endanger the international behavior and reputation of our country.
 .
