The authority of the governing entities has a great role in the process of social regulation of public life.
  Authority in the general sense means the overall influence of a person or organization on different spheres of public life, based on knowledge, moral values, experience, and in a narrow sense, it is one of the ways of exercising power [1, p. 17].
  Among the factors determining the effectiveness of the educational process, pedagogical authority has a special place, through which the subject of authority is able to influence both the behavior of individuals and the process of learning.
 Pedagogical authority, not related to social status, is the pedagogue's ability to influence students' thoughts, feelings, and behaviors through coercion and compensation. [2]
 The teacher acts as a transmitter of information in the teaching process and the success of the teaching process is conditioned not only by the simplicity and value of the transmitted information, but also by the person transmitting the information.
 The personal and professional factors of the teacher contribute to the increase of the importance of the teacher in the teaching environment, through which he / she mainly exerts his / her influence on the teaching process.
 In this process, the values ​​of both sides meet. The learner guides the teacher through the prism of his value orientations and forms an authoritative lecturer for himself.
  The learner expects significant behavior from a reputable teacher, including consistency in word and deed.
  The effectiveness of the influence of authority in interpersonal relationships increases if the authoritative teacher makes meaningful, favorable and reasoned decisions for the learners.
 Sympathy, respect and trust are the basis for the formation of the teacher's reputation.
 Sympathy (derived from the Greek word sympatheia, which means inclination, aspiration, positive mood) is a stable, positive attitude towards someone, expressed in kindness, goodwill, admiration, communication, attention and help.
  [3, p. 297] Respect is an unassuming assessment of an individual's activities or personal qualities by those around him or her, which does not depend on status or credit.
 [4] Trust, as a psychological relationship, includes: 465 PEDAGOGY 1. interest and respect for the object or partner 2. perception of the needs that can be met during the interaction with the latter 3. sense of anticipation of needs and positive emotional assessment of the partner 4. weakness and unwillingness to show goodwill unconditionally 5. perform certain actions , which will promote successful interaction [5, p. 45].
 Pre-formed trust in students helps to further strengthen the respect and sympathy they already have.
  These feelings facilitate easy access to the material being conveyed and increase the force of persuasion during the impact.
  Feelings of sympathy and respect give rise to evaluative judgments and unconditional trust in the teacher and the person.
 Each authoritative lecturer acts as a required source of information for the students.
  Relying on his reputation, the teacher effectively satisfies the students' cognitive needs.
  Due to scientific and technical progress, development and changes in social life, students' cognitive needs change over time and confidence in the teacher decreases to some extent.
  The learner perceives the Internet as a reliable source of information, not the lecturer.
  The learner perceives the knowledge gained from the Internet without filtering and faster, because he receives the information from the teacher with a delay, but in a purified (pure) form, that is, reliable information is transmitted.
  In these conditions, the preferences for information do not coincide with the learner and the teacher.
  Confidence in the Internet is growing.
  The above-mentioned rhyme 466 EXERCISE There is a need to emphasize the image of a teacher due to childhood.
 Due to technological progress, access to information and variety of sources, trust in the teacher decreases.
  Reputation is a way to increase the level of trust in the authenticity of the material provided.
  The degree of trust is also conditioned by what information the learner expects from a reputable lecturer.
 Reputation has its duration.
  If the views and values ​​of the person who has passed the stages of authority formation do not correspond to the requirements of the time, then his authority can be completely extinguished.
  In the case of a value system that meets the needs of society, authority helps to block the spread of old orientations and forms new orientations.
 Pedagogical influence through authority also presupposes the existence of power.
  Using his authority, the teacher manages the educational process, obviously not showing his authority, but relying on it.
  During that time, the students fulfill the demands of the authoritative teacher without hesitation, inspired by confidence.
  Demand contributes to the strengthening of the teacher-learner relationship, the formation of mutual understanding, the establishment of working relations.
  In this context, interpersonal interaction takes place on the basis of emotional connection, when learners make the teacher's views, opinions and values ​​their property.
  Authority is exercised due to the perceptions of the affected persons, as the level of their perception and value system is conditioned by the evaluation of the views, opinions and values ​​of the authoritative person.
 Through influence, influence increases the emotional sensitivity of the subjects, the confidence in the information received, the barriers to mutual communication are removed.
 The effectiveness of the lecturer-student interaction is conditioned by the building of authority-based relationships.
  The existence of an authority-based relationship is related to the various competencies of the teacher, which he / she needs to solve professional problems.
 In higher education institutions, where along with education there is also a service (related to the exercise of powers), the formation of authority is also influenced by the position, title, work style, subordinate relations and service discipline.
  It should be noted that in such an environment, authority is connected with the exercise of governmental powers, not on the basis of "authority of authority", but of "authority of authority".
  In other words, the real authority influences, avoiding violence, it is based only on mutual understanding, which reduces the interpersonal complexes in such relations.
  By forming relationships without complexes and using the power of authority, the teacher is able to effectively manage the classroom.
  Using his authority and not emphasizing his preference, the teacher achieves the effective solution of the pedagogical problems of the educational process through self-presentation.
 As a result of research, we came to the conclusion that the term "authority" affects the educational process in the following way: 1. Increases the level of confidence in the teacher 2. Creates a sense of easy comprehension of the material conveyed 3. Promotes the formation of new orientations and prevents the spread of old orientations 468 TEACHING 4. Strengthens the teacher-learner connection and removes communication barriers effective 6. more complex pedagogical problems are solved through authority.
 Therefore, in modern conditions, the formation of authority must be achieved by striving for a creative level of teaching culture, showing a strong personality and influencing all the technological tricks of pedagogy.
 .
