E-commerce continues to grow rapidly, but competition is growing faster than the market.
  This means that it will be more and more difficult to attract customers and lose them.
 E-commerce shows certain trends, which are of a global nature, leaving great consequences.
 If marketers want to succeed, they must take into account each of these trends when developing a strategy.
  The existence of a strategy is also necessary in the current competitive conditions.
  According to a survey by marketing consulting firm Smart Insights, 77% of professional marketers believe that planning is the most important and effective factor in e-marketing, and only 14% believe that the best situational approach is 1.
 Let's list the most important of these tendencies. 1. The driving force behind the growth of global e-commerce is Asia E-commerce has long been a global phenomenon, but since its inception, the market leader and driver of market growth has been the United States.
  Over the past 15 years, US annual sales growth of 10% has led to an explosive growth in e-commerce.
  As a result, the US is very close to the level of saturation and it is expected that e-sales will stop growing or, at least, will slow down.
 The opposite situation prevails in Asian markets, especially in China, where, according to forecasts, 92 ECONOMICS sales will continue to grow rapidly.
  The following are forecasts for e-commerce sales growth in the US and China, which account for the largest share of the global e-commerce market, and will be a major driver of global growth in the near future (see Figure 1).
 Figure 1. E-commerce sales growth rates in the US and China In 2015-2019, e-commerce sales in China are growing so rapidly that global e-commerce sales are projected to double by 2019.
 The relocation of the e-commerce growth center to Asian countries will have serious consequences for e-commerce companies.
  To take advantage of this trend, these companies must enter the international market.
  One of the advantages of e-commerce is that there is no need for physical infrastructure to enter the foreign market.
  The supply of international shipments at the lowest freight rates is increasing, and websites are reducing the importance of the state 93 ECONOMICS borders.
  Now it is not difficult to enter new countries and geographical markets, but in order to succeed in a new environment, it is necessary to develop an appropriate strategy in accordance with the habits and preferences of consumers in the area, to have a quality translated website, etc.
  2 2. Mobile device users do not accept the idea of ​​making electronic purchases from mobile devices. It is impossible not to notice the orientation of people towards mobile devices during the last 5 years.
  Mobile users make up more than half of all Internet users today.
 Surprisingly, the vast majority of users have not yet adapted to e-commerce via mobile devices.
  More than half of e-shoppers prefer to shop online via desktop because they are concerned about privacy and security.
  Figure 2 shows the results of an EMarketer survey on why mobile users avoid shopping on their mobile devices.
 94 ECONOMICS Figure 2. Reasons to Avoid Shopping on Mobile Devices A study by Wolfgang Digital provides another important piece of information.
  The company analyzed 80 million electronic transactions with a revenue of 230 million euros.
  The study showed that although 59% of all online visits were made via tablets and mobile phones, the revenue from these transactions was only 38% of the total revenue (see Figure 3).
  4 Desktops still dominate 95 ECONOMICS as a means of completing electronic transactions, and mobile devices as a means of searching and exploring goods.
  This phenomenon becomes more obvious when it comes to purchasing expensive goods or services, such as buying a leisure tour.
 Figure 3. Shares of views and purchases made via mobile devices and computers Thus, mobile users visit the site to study future purchases, then switch to the desktop computer to complete and complete the purchase transaction.
  Therefore, this fact should not be ignored and different people should be considered under the concepts of "mobile user" and "computer user", as a mobile user can become a computer user in one minute.
 This important fact should also be reflected in the e-shop postal strategy, for example, by sending a letter to the customer, which will remind and show the products viewed from the mobile device, thus imperceptibly pushing the transaction.
 ECONOMICS 3. Competition in e-commerce is heating up More and more young companies are entering the e-market, and existing brands continue to grow actively in the e-commerce environment.
 It is expected that in 2018 a new level of competition in the field of e-commerce will be formed and in the near future we will witness a torrent of marketing tools.
 If in 2011 about 150 names of marketing tools were used, today their number exceeds 3500.
  These tools are evolving to help marketers, and the more tools available, the greater the benefits.
  5 However, the increase in competition in 2018 will become a real headache for marketers, causing a content shock.
 Reasonable and flexible marketers will have to create unique and unique marketing tools in order to stand out from the crowd of competitors and be able to withstand the competition.
 4. Using artificial intelligence to make smart predictions The amount of data available to marketers has expanded the opportunities to work with target customers.
  However, the expansion of capabilities has not led to an increase in efficiency.
 How can huge amounts of data and hyper-targeting influence a customer's purchasing decision if they have been advertising the product they have already purchased for weeks or months?
 In fact, this phenomenon is the worst targeting in the world, as it advertises a product that a particular consumer is probably not going to buy anymore.
  Targeting must first be intelligently organized.
  It is this omission that fills the artificial intellect.
 97 ECONOMICS Funding for artificial intelligence projects has grown rapidly over the past three years. Funding for artificial intelligence projects has grown rapidly over the past three years, with a record number of transactions.
  These technologies are gaining more and more dignified recognition, because it is due to them that it becomes possible to study the interests and interests of a specific consumer and to organize more effectively targeted and personalized advertising for him.
  6 5. Chatbots Chatbots became the most influential marketing technology in 2017 and gained explosive popularity, although they appeared earlier.
 A bot is a program that imitates a user.
 In the past, they were mainly used to automate repetitive tasks.
  Now technology has developed so much that it can perform more complex functions.
 The robot interlocutor imitates the person you are communicating with.
  They are also sometimes called messenger bots, as the dialogue is usually done through messaging applications.
 Bots can be a living helper, at the same time you do not have to pay a salary or look for a candidate for the appropriate position.
  It creates a huge ocean of possibilities.
  For example, on a travel site, a bot can ask about your preferences, suggest several hotel options, compare prices, and order the most convenient option for you.
 In September 2016, Facebook launched this feature on its Messenger platform so that the consumer could make purchases with the help of 98 ECONOMICS bots.
  7 This function will soon cease to be an experimental novelty and will become commonplace, paving the way for the consumer.
 6. Personalized Video Selling Video selling is not an entirely new method.
 YouTube has been launching this technology since 2015.
  It would be wrong to consider the phenomenon when small pictures appear while watching the video to be impressive and unusual.
  However, it is expected that in 2018 the situation will change, and a personalized video with software will be created, significantly changing the form of sales through video.
  This is just a matter of time, which will become a new format of e-commerce advertising.
 Thus, e-commerce is a rapidly evolving sub-sector, which instantly responds to any trend observed in this area.
  That is why the marketing managers of the company should realize the importance of each of the listed trends.
 .
