The 20th century of post-Christian history ended with contradictory polarized historical and economic realities.
  On the one hand, the unprecedented growth of the Earth's population, which was followed by a huge increase in energy consumption on all continents, on the other hand, it caused an increase in the Earth's ambient temperature, sharp fluctuations in thermodynamic equilibrium and drastic climate change over the centuries.
  This increase in energy production and energy use was mainly due to the unprecedented dominance of cheap fossil fuel and gas combustion, which led to a thermodynamic imbalance in the environment.
  In addition, fossil fuels are a necessary and very important raw material for the development of the future economy.
  At the same time, the population of the country has long realized that fossil hydrocarbons should not be burned for energy, but used as a natural raw material for food and much-needed applications.
  On the other hand, the massive reserves of fossil hydrocarbons obtained by the easy method have been reduced as a result of burning in thermal power plants.
  Fossil hydrocarbons are now obtained from deeper, hard-to-reach wells or coastal layers, which is why the cost is increasing.
  According to the exponential law, the population of the country is growing, and the provision of food with the necessary sowing areas is constantly decreasing.
  The beginning of the 21st century was necessarily characterized by the widespread introduction of VEA based on the use of VFE.
  However, observing and comparing the average annual increases of different VEAs, it becomes clear that the annual growths of cascading photovoltaic and concentrated solar photovoltaic devices are 42% and 35%, respectively, and are the highest of the various VEAs [1].
 The continuation of these growth rates in the coming decades and the increase in funding lead to the belief that in the middle of the 21st century, the main part of electricity production will also be provided by solar panels, which will also contribute to the stabilization of the environment and climate.
  The conversion of FVE to other forms of energy needed by mankind and its widespread use is completely harmless from the point of view of the environment and the security of life, there is no noise, no motors, no harmful emissions and no waste.
  The production and operation of PV-based PV semiconductors is not only 36 environmentally friendly, but also allows for the need to be centralized in the production of electricity alone, as in the case of hydrocarbon combustion energy, and to shift to decentralized power generation and distribution. also switch to the use of lower voltages in terms of life safety [2].
  These economic and environmental considerations are the reason why 90% of the global production of PVE is now carried out using Si semiconductor elements [3].
  Due to this circumstance, in recent years the "Heliotechnika" research laboratory of ANAU has been working on the creation of new photoelectric modules for Si [4].
  The disadvantage of PVE modules based on Si semiconductor elements was that the sealing of the transformer surfaces with adhesive polymeric materials, such as ethyl-vinyl-acetate, and the forced bonding of the protective glass surface reduced the semiconductor efficiency of the semiconductor and
  They become more noticeable when, over the years, the sun's UV rays reduce the light transmittance of the polymer adhesive film, which in turn leads to a reduction in the total power of the photoelectric module and the OGG.
  In case of their continuous use for 20 years, the value of the total OGG decreases by about 25% [3].
  Heterosexual solar elements were also developed from semiconductor materials with high multilayer absorption coefficients using transparent solar diffusers.
  Especially with transparent Fresnel heliotechnical concentrators, solar photoelectric modules have been developed [5], on the basis of which the stations, in addition to the ability to provide high efficiency and energy, also perform the necessary function of monitoring the movement of the Sun [6].
  In the case of 500-fold condensed beams of cascading photoelectric elements made from four different semiconductors, the efficiency was increased to 46%.
  It was expected that such record efficiency of cascading solar multiplication elements in the case of 500-fold condensed radiation would replace solar photovoltaic modules based on Si semiconductor elements, but so far .
 Therefore, it is necessary to eliminate the shortcomings found in the Si semiconductor elements and develop more competitive technology to increase the efficiency of these elements.
 37 Solar Photoelectric Si Transformer Making Technology. On the surface of Si containing a p-n potential barrier or with only p-type conductivity, different nanostructured carbon membranes are created using the same ionoplasmic technological device (Fig. 1) made in the Heliotechnica Research Laboratory (Fig. 1). reduce the values ​​in the whole range to 0.01-0.005 instead of the previously prepared 0.02-0.05 [9] reflection coefficients.
  The platforms on which homogeneous nanostructured membranes are placed are attached to a rotating system that provides planetary motion (Fig. 1b).
  In the initial vacuum (10 -6 mm Hg column) the chamber is supplied by a turbomolecular Pfeiffer pump and plasma surface cleaning is performed, after which Ar and N 2 gases are introduced by ion sources and a magnetron and hydrocarbon compound CxHy H (for example C 7 H 8). C 2 H 2) and vapors with up to 1-2% accuracy in the required ratio.
  On the outside of the vacuum chamber (Fig. 1a) are installed three-source systems and sensors (gases control systems and sensors), which are controlled by microcontrollers.
 a b Fig.1. Appearance of the technological device (a). and the internal structure of the vacuum chamber (b). 1- vacuum chamber, 2- radial ion source, 3- linear ion source, 4- magnetron dusting source, 5- platform rotation system, 6- increasing membrane thickness measurement system head, 7- plasma radiation spectrum recording system, 8- light conductors.
 38 This system, which monitors the distribution of plasma fluxes at different points through a system of real-time sensors that detect plasma radiation, flexible luminaires, and a computer, allows it to monitor the spatial variation of plasma from ion source to platform.
  Plasma spectrum was measured with Ocean Optics HR2000 + spectrometer for the 200-1100 nm spectral range.
  The measurement of this spectral range takes about 100 milliseconds, which allows measurements to be made in parallel with changes in plasma.
  Figure 1b shows the two-dimensional appearance of the technological chamber with sensors that control the sources of the three gas flows of ions and a system that transmits external motion to the platforms.
  In case of constant power of ion source and constant composition of gas mixture, rotating system Fig.2. Intersections of intermittent layers formed on the surface of the Si energy phototransformer element. 1-p-type conducting Si is a sheet or surface-coated pn with potential barrier, 2 photosensitive membranes, 3-conductor and translucent membranes with 4 foils at its ends, 5,6,7-reflecting and insulating membranes, which simultaneously perform Si- the role of surface protection.
 and a deviation voltage is applied to the substrate from the external device, which varies in the range of -300 V to +300 V.
  In the nanostructure, in the case of the predominance of the diamond phase, sp3, the specific resistance and permeability of the film increases, and in case of the superiority of sp3, the electrical conductivity.
  Figure 2 shows the surface of a photosensitive element of a Si crystal with pn-type conductivity coated with AAT2.
  This significantly increases the mobility, life expectancy and photosensitivity of current carriers on the surface of Si.
  Greater experimental skill is required in the conduction of electrically conductive and at the same time translucent membrane 3 and 4-contact wall 39 on the surface of membrane 2.
  The common layers 5, 6, 7 between the 4 transmitting contacts are made of nanostructured insulating AATs, which differ from each other in refractive index values ​​and membrane thicknesses.
 Replacing the two outer membranes that do not reflect sunlight [9] with three intermittent insulation membranes (Fig. 2), which have new values ​​for the following refractive indices n-indicators and d-thicknesses of the membranes, such as n 5 = 2.4 and d 5 = 50 nm; n 6 = 1.8 and d 6 = 30 nm; n 7 = 1.5 and d 7 = 98 nm (5-7, Fig. 1), which are selected so that the reflection of light from the surface of the Si converter is about 3 times smaller than [9] in the entire range of the converter's sensitivity.
  In addition, the coating of light-sensitive surfaces with discrete layers of diamond-like carbon membranes also protects the surface of the Si semiconductor from corrosive external influences for a long time [10].
  Fig. Membrane 2 (2), manufactured directly on the surface of Si with the technology developed by AAT [8-10], increases the mobility of unbalanced Si currents created by light by 3050%, creating a special light-sensitive layer on the surface. (2), on the surface of which the plasma flow of C +, H +, N +, Ar + is increased by 40 to 80% by the amount of nitrogen present in the plasma flow, a nanostructured layer of AAT with metal conductivity is made (3), the specific resistance of which is 10 -4 Ohm * cm , and the light transmittance coefficient is 85-90%.
  The light-emitting current carriers are collected from the surface of the converter by a transmitting layer, which has two conductors (4) at both ends, which connect the converter elements [8] in series (10) in series or in parallel (see Fig. 3).
  The translucent layer with metal conduction, as mentioned, is covered with three AAT nanostructured insulating, intermittent and non-reflecting membranes. To maximize the maximum OG and durability of the Si photoelectric module, the ethyl-methyl-acetyl polymer polymer, which creates the hermeticity of previously light-sensitive elements and modules, is removed from the light-sensitive surfaces of the converter due to the small adhesive layer that adheres to the glass surface. ogg of converters.
  In addition to this shortcoming, over the years, the UV rays of the Sun reduce the translucency of the adhesive polymer film, which in 20-25 years reduces the overall power of the device and the OGG by about 15-25%.
  On the other hand, in this case, the Si-semiconductor plates are largely broken by hail.
  Therefore, their surface 40 is also protected by unbreakable, tempered, high-permeability glass (12), on which the converter elements (8) are no longer glued with adhesive polymer membranes (Fig. 3).
 Fig.3. The sections of the structure and the frame of the photovoltaic module of the solar energy conversion and the bundles of aluminum films attached to the connecting layer. There is a gap between the surfaces of the converter elements (8) and the protective glass (12)
  In order to keep it below 70 0 C, bundles of thin aluminum membranes (11) are attached to the connecting layer (9) of the transformer bearing elements, which are cooled by air flows.
  The connecting layers (9) and the protective glass (12) supporting the transformer elements are firmly fixed in two different grooves of the aluminum frame (13) (Fig. 3).
  Fig. Figure 4 shows the layer connecting the transformer elements (9) and that Figure 4. Bonding layer (9), frame (13), bundles of aluminum membranes (11) are attached by the photoelectric module.
 Bundles of cooling aluminum membranes (11) attached to the rear layer, photovoltaic module frame (13) fasteners (14 and 15) to the structure supporting the modules from the rear.
  Developed photovoltaic elements and modules can be fully produced both in the Republic of Armenia and in very developed countries.
 Conclusion 1. In order to alleviate the energy crisis expected in the middle of the 21st century, large financial investments, urgent training of highly qualified specialists in the field of energy are needed, great energy and commitment to make radical changes in the country's energy in a short period of time.
 2. Development of efficient photovoltaic elements, modules, networks using high technologies and organization of their production in the Republic of Armenia as well.
 3. Apply both advanced efficient photovoltaic modules based on Si-unique technologies and new photomodules using thin inorganic and organic membrane, small semiconductor arrays.
 .
