The most common type of legal succession of individuals is inheritance.
  Taking into account the importance of this institution, Part 2 of Article 60 of the Constitution stipulates that the right to inherit is guaranteed [1].
  Although it is enshrined in an article governing property rights, it is not a property right.
  However, the exercise of the right to inherit is a legal fact for the origin of the right of ownership.
 The Institute of Heritage regulates in more detail the RA Civil Code (hereinafter the Code), according to which Article 1184, Part 1, in case of inheritance, the property of the deceased (inheritance) in an unchanged state, as a whole, passes to other persons (comprehensive legal succession) not provided for in the rules of this Code 211 JURISDICTION [3].
  The inheritance includes the property belonging to the heir on the opening day of the inheritance, including money, securities, property rights and obligations.
 It follows from the above-mentioned norms that after the death of the heir, in addition to the property and property rights belonging to the heir, the responsibilities of the heir also pass to the heirs.
  Therefore, the acceptance of an inheritance for the heir is not limited to the acceptance of assets only.
  The latter also bears obligations to the creditor creditors within the framework of the inherited property.
  Such an obligation is established by Article 1244 of the Code, according to part 1 of which the heirs, after receiving the certificate of inheritance right, reimburse the expenses related to the inheritance within the value of the property they have passed [3].
  Moreover, the Code defines the terms for the heirs' creditors to submit their claims to the addressees.
  Thus, the creditors have the right to submit their claims within six months from the day of opening the inheritance.
 The claims may be submitted to the heir or testator who received the inheritance before the heirs receive a certificate of the right to inherit, and in the absence of the mentioned persons, to the notary of the place of opening the inheritance.
  [3] First of all, let's look at the deadline for the creditor to submit a claim.
  The Code stipulates a period of six months for the creditor's creditors to submit a claim, which starts from the day of the heir's death.
  It follows from the definition of such a term that the claims of the creditor of the heir submitted after its expiration are not subject to satisfaction.
  A similar position was expressed by the Court of Cassation, which registered No. 3-1778 (VD). "(....) After receiving the certificate of inheritance right, the heir may bear obligations within the limits of the property transferred to him by the creditor's debts within six months from the opening of the inheritance (or before receiving the certificate of inheritance right) by the creditors.
  The claims submitted after the expiration of the six-month period for filing claims, in accordance with the procedure established by Article 1244, Clause 1 of the RA Civil Code, are not subject to satisfaction, because before receiving the certificate of inheritance, only the heir could decide on the expediency of accepting the inheritance.
  [8] Given the fact that the above 6-month period begins to run from the date of opening of the inheritance and its omission in accordance with the legislation leads to the termination of the creditor's claim, a logical question arises. And what happens to the creditor's right to claim if the latter did not know and could not have known about the debtor's death?
  Logically, the creditor in such cases should have the opportunity, at least in court, to recognize the omission of the deadline set by law for filing a claim.
  However, the Code does not give such an opportunity to the creditor of the heir.
  Moreover, referring to the issue of omitting the deadline for the creditor to submit a claim, the RA Court of Cassation confirms the absence of such an opportunity in the absence of such regulation by law.
  Thus, the Court of Cassation by decision No. ARAD / 0416/02/13 records: "Moreover, the Court of Cassation considers it necessary to emphasize that the term defined by Article 1243 of the RA Civil Code is classified as a legalizing term, which means that the omission of that term leads to the loss of the creditor's right.
 Thus, in practice, it is not excluded that after the opening of the inheritance, the creditor of the heir may not know objectively about the death of the debtor for a certain period of time.
 Meanwhile, both Article 1243 of the RA Civil Code, as well as other rights related to the reimbursement of expenses related to inheritance do not provide for any exceptions in this regard.
  Moreover, the legislation of the Republic of Armenia does not provide for the possibility of considering the reason for skipping the deadline for the claimant to submit a claim to the heirs on the grounds of not being aware of the death of the relevant person and (or) restoring that deadline.
 Based on the above, the Court of Cassation records that if the creditors do not file claims within six months from the date of opening the inheritance, they are deprived of the opportunity to exercise their right to file claims against the debtor's heirs in the future. ”
  [9] Under such arrangements, the protection of the creditor's rights is reasonably questioned, as the latter's right may be terminated in circumstances beyond his control, which he can in no way overcome.
 In accordance with Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the Convention), every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions.
  No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided for by law and by the general principles of international law.
  [2] In addition to movable and immovable property (rights in rem), as well as intellectual property, the European Court of Human Rights considers property in personam (property in personam) as property within the meaning of the Convention.
  In the case of Mario DE NAPOLES PACHECO v / BELGIUM (Complaint No. 7775/77) the Committee confirmed by decision of 05.10.1978 that the claim could be property.
  The claim will be considered as protected property if all the necessary conditions for its recognition are met [10, page 12].
 The RA Constitutional Court by decision No. SDO-741 states: "The protection of property rights guaranteed by Article 31 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia is provided to those persons whose property rights have already been recognized in accordance with the law, or who have a legal expectation to acquire property rights by the force of law." [5]
  And the basis of legal expectation is not only the law.
  A person may have a similar expectation from a contract, other transaction or event.
 It follows from the above that the creditor's right to claim against another person is subject to protection in the same way as a person's property right.
  Therefore, the guarantees of protection of the property right are applicable to the protection of that right.
 According to parts 1 and 4 of Article 60 of the RA Constitution, everyone has the right to possess, use and dispose of the property acquired on a legal basis at his own discretion.
  No one may be deprived of his property except in a court of law.
  [1] The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia by decision No. SDO-1140 records: "Both at the international legal and constitutional levels, the positive obligation of public authorities to ensure guarantees of inviolability of property rights is established, in particular: First, to recognize and protect the right to property without discrimination, regardless of the forms of its manifestation; second, to guarantee the protection of property rights by creating preconditions for the free possession, use and management of legally owned property, as well as the free development and equal legal protection of all forms of property. , third, to define the scope permitted by the law on the freedom to exercise property rights for a purpose predetermined by the Constitution;
  [7] It follows from the above that the State is obliged to guarantee the protection of property rights, which is first exercised by establishing the legal procedures necessary for the exercise of that right.
  And in this case, setting a 6-month term for the creditor, without the possibility of restoring its omission in certain circumstances, directly deprives the creditor of his property right, considering the given right terminated.
 And the RA Constitutional Court with its decision CC-903 referred to the features of deprivation of property right, particularly noting: "The institution of deprivation of property is characterized by the following main mandatory elements: - in case of deprivation of property there is a gratuitous termination of the right of ownership over the given property against the will and consent of the owner, - in case of deprivation of property is used as a measure of liability, - in case of deprivation of property there is simultaneous possession, possession and use of the property. and complete cessation without guarantee of continuity. "
  [6] In this case, there is a complete, simultaneous and gratuitous termination of the hereditary creditor's property rights without guaranteeing continuity, which is a negative consequence for the owner not to file a claim within 6 months from the date of opening the inheritance.
  That is, the creditor-owner bears responsibility in the form of deprivation of the right of ownership, for not submitting a claim within the period defined by the Code.
  And the latter might not have known about the death of the heir-debtor, which would have reasonably deprived the owner of the opportunity to present his claim.
  And at least in this case, it turns out that the owner bears responsibility (loses the right of ownership) independently in the absence of guilt.
  And the definition of such responsibility directly contradicts the 1st and 4th parts of Article 60 of the Constitution.
 Taking into account the above, we find that the law should directly provide that in case of death of the heir-debtor, his creditor has the right to recognize the omission of the six-month period, if the latter proves that he did not know and could not reasonably know about the death of the heir-debtor.
 At the same time, it should be noted that the Court of Cassation, by its decision ARAD / 0416/02/13, referred to the purpose of setting a deadline for the heir creditors to submit claims, in particular, noting: "In each case, when exercising his right of inheritance, the heir must have a clear idea of ​​both the composition of the property included in the estate, as well as the obligations of the heir.
  If, as a rule, the composition of the inheritance is clear to the heir, the situation is different in the case of the heir's obligations.
  The heir can have a certain idea about the latter only if the creditors submit relevant claims within the period defined by law.
  In such circumstances, the Court of Cassation finds that the legislator, by setting a deadline for the heir creditors to submit claims, has, in fact, provided preconditions for the heir to decide on the exercise of his inheritance right by taking into account the property and the heir's obligations.
  [9] We consider that the Court of Cassation did not consider it from the point of view of restricting the property rights of the heirs' creditors, considering the issue of exercising or renouncing the right of inheritance by taking into account the obligations.
  In this case, there is an unfair relationship between the creditor's right of claim (property right) and the heir exercising the right to inherit.
  Even if the heir knows about the existing obligations only after accepting the inheritance (the creditor has not submitted a claim within six months), the latter can be liable with those obligations only within the framework of the inherited property.
  That is, as such, even if there are obligations, the latter will not be in a more unfavorable situation than if he had not accepted the inheritance.
  The negative consequences for the heir creditor are obvious.
  Consequently, the issue of the heir deciding whether or not to accept the inheritance, taking into account the existing obligations in the current case law, prevails over the creditor-owner's property right, which directly violates the fundamental right of the owner stipulated by Article 6 of the Constitution.
  Taking into account the above, we find that the ratio between the rights of the parties is not correctly determined in the case law.
 As for Article 1243 2 2 of the Code, it defines the circle of persons to whom creditors may submit their claims.
  However, as the Court of Cassation rightly states, the legislator did not define the procedure for submitting those claims.
  Consequently, the creditor must exercise the right in such a way as to prove the fact of informing the subjects (heir or testator) provided for in part 2 of Article 1243, and in the absence of the mentioned persons, the notary of the place of opening the inheritance).
 The problem is that according to Article 1244, Part 1, the expenses provided for in Article 1242 (the creditor's claim is considered the third turn) are reimbursed by the heir after receiving the inheritance certificate.
  And the heirs may receive the inheritance with actual possession (without the knowledge of the creditors) or there may be no heirs at all.
  In such conditions, the question arises when and how the creditor should be satisfied with the heir's property.
 In the absence of heirs, the inheritance is 216 JURISDICTION property, not encumbered by anyone's right, inherited property, and is transferred to the ownership of the community of the place of opening the inheritance.
 Taking into account that the inherited property transferred to the community property is not encumbered by any right, it becomes clear that the creditor's claim must be satisfied by that moment.
  However, the legislator does not establish a clear procedure for satisfying the creditor's claim.
  And according to Article 75 of the Constitution, when regulating fundamental rights and freedoms, the laws establish the organizational structures and procedures necessary for the effective exercise of those rights and freedoms. [1]
  Therefore, there is a problem of definiteness of the law related to the exercise of the creditor's property right.
 Taking into account the above, there is a need to clearly regulate the procedure for satisfying the creditor's claims in case of the death of the heir-debtor, from the point of view of exercising the property rights of the latter.
  In all cases, it must be carried out before the property is declared hereditary.
 We believe that in the absence of heirs (as well as in case they do not submit an application for a certificate of inheritance) the claims of creditors should be satisfied from the property included in the inheritance after the indisputability of the creditor's claim is confirmed by a notary or court.
 Summing up the above, we come to the conclusion that: 1. In case of death of the heir-debtor, it is necessary to establish the possibility of recognizing the omission of the 6-month period by the creditor to submit a claim under Article 1243 of the Code and to restore the missed period.
  The absence of such an opportunity for the creditor should be interpreted as a violation of the creditor's property right. 2. It is necessary to establish a clear procedure for satisfying the creditor's claims in the event of the death of the heir-debtor in case the application for an inheritance certificate has not been submitted by any person.
 .
