What is terrorism?
  Modern man will not be faced with a dilemma of relevant concepts to interpret and describe it.
  Many, however, have a generalized and rather vague idea of ​​what terrorism really is.
  Many people are not satisfied with finding a clear and real explanation for this concept, and the authors of many studies agree that it is very difficult to give an unambiguous explanation.
 The concept of terrorism comes from the Latin word terror, which means fear, horror.
  Individual and group "terror" is distinguished.
  In the seventies and nineties of the last century, the term 471 PHILOSOPHY, understood as international terrorism, began to circulate.
  The actions of terrorists are not always connected with murder, but they always contain threats, horror, violence, warnings.
  The goals can also be different. purely mercenary, based on the pursuit of profit, political, and so on.
  Terrorist acts are also carried out for the sake of the idea.
  Today, the number of known terrorist organizations in the world reaches 500, and their annual budget is $ 20 billion [1, p. 45].
 Terrorism is a crime that can be committed by one person against another or against several individuals and objects.
  It is not typical for terrorism as an international crime today to act alone [2, p. 41].
 Richard Falk, a well-known American expert on international law, comments that terrorism is a form of political violence that has no adequate moral or legal justification, regardless of who the revolutionary group or the government seeks [3, p. 36].
 In the literature, the concepts of intimidation and terrorism are used to interpret different phenomena, which, however, have one thing in common. the use of violence against individuals, social groups and classes.
 According to other interpretations, terrorism is a form of politically motivated violence, it is the regular intimidation of the authorities for political, social, revolutionary purposes [4, p. 37].
 As for the history of terrorism, it has a history of two centuries for some researchers.
 However, Yordanov, speaking about the sources of terrorism, attributes it to biblical times.
  He considers Cain the first "terrorist" who killed his brother, and the other "terrorists" who continued his work bear the "Cain seal".
  Terrorism was widespread in ancient times in the form of states and individuals seeking power.
 472 PHILOSOPHY Terrorism can be classified into different groups according to different criteria and categories. Պետության Terrorism carried out by the state in international affairs,։ Terrorism against dictators,։ Terrorism carried out by the state against other countries,։ Terrorism of the state against the people, a certain class, social group, organization, sect, group.
  Terrorism perpetrated by bigots,  Terrorism perpetrated by people with mental health problems,  Terrorism against the government,  Terrorism for the sake of power [5, p. 55] However, what is the basis of terrorism, what makes a person take such a step and even to deprive innocent people of their lives at the cost of their own lives.
  The roots of terrorism are different.
  The main sources of origin should be sought in national peculiarities and ethnic wars.
 Terrorism today is more connected with the Islamic world and Islam than ever before.
  In describing Islamic terrorism, the main source of which is Islamic socio-religious organizations in Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan, it is appropriate to use terms such as "most" and "greatest".
 For the last twenty-five years, these terrorists have been the most fanatical and active.
  Most of them took hostages, most of them killed people and carried out explosions.
  And they, more than others, managed to influence international politics [6, p. 247].
  Therefore, the question of how and why Islamist terrorism arose, what effect it had on its political situation in the world, what is Islamic fundamentalism and what does it have to do with Islamic terrorism?
 Islamic terrorist groups are in close contact because they have a common enemy. the Western way of life and Israel as a state of unbelievers.
  They have a strong financial base at the expense of extremist Islamic organizations operating in all Muslim countries.
 In reality, however, fundamentalism is not at all equated with political radicalism, extremism and is not indirectly the cause of terrorism [7, p. 54].
  Terrorist fanatics are the least concerned about the "cleansing" of Islam, their roots lie in hatred of the West, it is not religious, but cultural-civilizational, psychological, geopolitical.
 Based on our information on the worldview and ideological foundations of Islamic extremists, it can be concluded that: 1. Islamism should not be considered as a struggle between the rich and the poor.
  The problem of poverty and material backwardness does not occupy a central place in their ideology at all, and the development of means of transport and international communication increases the risks of terrorist activities.
 By planting a bomb in one place, a terrorist can destroy an entire passenger plane from another, safe place.
  And the development of information technologies in recent years gives an opportunity to propagate extremist ideas.
  The Internet domain is especially widely used.
  Many terrorist groups have their pages in this cover.
  And the paradox is that they, unlike many state institutions and individual citizens, use the Internet to spread their propaganda freely.
 474 PHILOSOPHY The active and sometimes over-focused attention of the media contributes to the global problem of terrorism.
  If tragic events such as natural disasters such as earthquakes, floods, tsunamis, etc. occur in one day and a building or plane is blown up as a result of a terrorist attack in another place, it is safe to say that it will appear on the front pages of newspapers and media. The terrorist act as an important event.
  Such are the criteria of the media for choosing urgent issues.
  In this respect, terrorist acts are more valuable and preferable for the electronic and print media in terms of announcing "daily news" [8, p. 198].
 In the new era of terrorism, the representatives of the media not only find themselves under the baton of censorship, but also become the target of terrorists from different angles, both as a target of terrorism and as a means and facilitator of terrorism.
 Many experts have now come to the conclusion that terrorists have made some changes in the ways and methods of their actions.
  In other words, the terrorists want to see not watching a large number of dead people, but watching people.
  They want maximum publicity, they want to make their messages available to a wide audience through all possible media.
  Even if the killer makes a mistake or the bomb does not explode, it is enough for the terrorists just that many people immediately find out about their intention.
 Terrorism, as a unique phenomenon, is associated with the feeling of horror.
  "Terror (terreur) is the excitement of the soul because of the impending danger, which is an indescribably great fear" [9, p. deadly danger: volcanic eruption, burning 475 PHILOSOPHY letter, war, violence or possibility of violence.
  Thus, if we put aside the natural factors, any kind of nature can be qualified as terrorism, if that violence really terrifies its victims.
  However, in that case the definition and decision of terrorism becomes very wide.
 In modern dictionaries, terrorism is defined as: "A process of violence, a crime, committed regularly to frighten certain groups" [9, p. 725].
  Such a definition of terrorism requires at least two actors: a terrorist and a terrorized person, and a unique relationship between them that is enforced by rules dictated by the terrorist.
 It is absolutely impossible to point out the terrorist and the subjects subject to terrorism, as it depends on the peculiarities of the system.
  The same subject can be a terrorist in one system and a terrorist in another system.
 Terrorism always has a purpose and significance, an ideology, and very often these phenomena are absent in violence [10, p. 32].
  That is why we mention that it is a unique form of self-expression, as it is not arbitrary.
  It is always thought out and systematized.
 Terrorism, like any social phenomenon, has its sources, motivated by political, economic, ethnic and religious factors.
  This seems to be the response of oppressed, misunderstood, rejected and poor groups.
  It is their revenge for inequality, injustice and discrimination.
  "Terrorism is not born from non-existence.
  "It has reasons that very little justify this phenomenon, but always explain it," thinks French political scientist K. Julen [11, p. 12].
  Here they try to correct the evil through evil, but this process brings with it (requires) many innocent victims.
  They try to establish justice and make their voice heard.
 476 PHILOSOPHY Terrorists are not born, they become terrorists in specific social conditions that affect the behavior, mentality, thinking and perception of individuals.
 Terrorism can also be defined as a tactic based on violence.
  Terrorism differs from other types of violence in its consciousness and organization, therefore it can be concluded that it is a more rational phenomenon than irrational.
  It seems to be a mathematical calculation used to achieve a set goal.
  It does not matter whether that goal is rational or not.
  Terrorism, as experience has shown, has a definite opposite effect.
  "It is incomprehensible," says the French political scientist Jean Bessler, "how the assassination of several capitalists could lead to the abolition of capitalism" [12, p. 22].
  Terrorism, regardless of its real consequences, is rational, because terrorists choose from many means to achieve their goal and choose one.
  From Spartacus and his supporters to Hiroshima Nagasaki, terrorism is a well-developed tactic with a rational stamp.
  Its main purpose is not destruction and death, but their threat.
 Terrorism has always served as a tool, that method is as old as politics itself, and it is not one of the peculiarities of the new times.
 If in the case of collective violence there are two actors (the mob and its victim), then at least three actors are needed for terrorism: the terrorist, the object and the victims who are surprised by it.
  In other words, terrorism may not be aimed at the object itself, but other purposes may be hidden under it.
  For example, mass shootings or burning unbelievers on fire, where the main purpose is to punish.
 Thus, in order for punishment to be beneficial, it must "make a more effective impression on those who are not guilty", because "they will thus avoid the risk that the crime brings" [12, p. 34].
 477 PHILOSOPHY The main criterion of punishment should be the benefit of society.
  Punishments were originally intended to discipline, and then their severity should be judged not so much by how it affects the guilty but by how it impresses the innocent.
  It is not about the punishment of sins committed, but about preventing such processes.
 Robespierre, one of the leaders of the great French revolution, claimed that the death of the convict not only did not serve as an exhortation, but also contradicted the goal pursued. On the one hand, it evokes pity for the executed person, on the other hand, the constant presence in the execution scenes seems to "create immunity" to the blood and the phenomenon.
  It never reduces the number of crimes, but allows the people to taste the blood, and ultimately, leads to an increase in the number of crimes.
  Being an adaptable being, a person, being present in a process, inadvertently makes that process reflective for himself.
 Another French revolutionary, Talen, argued that terrorism could in no way make society more friendly, as it made the nation immoral, which led to the society "becoming incapable of accepting freedom" because of fear. He trains people to slavery.
 Although justice is not synonymous with benevolence, it should not be confused with terrorism, even if it really creates fear.
  The difference between them is that justice is directed against the processes, and terrorism is directed against individuals, regardless of their actions.
  Thus, the types of fear that each of them causes are radically different from each other.
  Justice, Talen explains, breeds "fear of certain circumstances, it is the fear that follows the crime, the prudent fear of the days," and terrorism causes "unbreakable spiritual torment despite the feeling of innocence" [13, p. 17- 34].
 478 PHILOSOPHY Justice evokes "reasonable" fear, because punishment is delivered by pre-determined and defined criteria, which applies only to the guilty.
  Terrorism, on the contrary, spreads universal fear, because it is an act of violence.
  It threatens everyone, whether they are guilty or not.
  It is used at random, without motives and evidence.
  Terrorism is a kingdom of disorder and unrest.
 Violence breeds violence.
  When someone is abused, retaliatory violence does not make them wait, even if the abused person no longer has an ontological reality.
  This is not a straight line process, but a spiral one.
  At each level of the spiral, the magnitude and form of violence are improved [14, pp. 60-72].
 And the more our world develops, the more the ways and opportunities of oppression increase.
 .
