The antisocial behaviors, causes and consequences typical for the servicemen of the RA Ministry of Defense are always of urgent importance.
  The aim of the work is to study the forms of behavior and deviations in the conditions of military service, the wrong implementation of the rules of behavior due to the degree of aggression, which can lead to anti-social behavior, find their inconsistencies and provide professional solutions.
  422 PSYCHOLOGY leads to its lack of information and lack of research on the issue, which will hinder the military in the military field and the manifestation of the right behavior on the part of them.
  The problem now needs to be explored and addressed in order to reduce antisocial behavior among servicemen.
  Among the issues raised within the framework of our ongoing research are: to get acquainted with the approaches to the problem studied in the professional literature, to study the peculiarities of the behaviors of the examined servicemen and the types of behavior conditioned by it.
  The implementation of the mentioned tasks dictates the urgency of the issue raised in the article.
 Anti-social behavior and its manifestations come in various forms both in civilian life and in the military sphere.
  The level of aggression of an individual / soldier / is directly related to antisocial, deviant behavior.
  Extremely aggressive aggression can turn into an adaptation strategy, and therefore a character trait, and lead to deviant, antisocial behavior.
  Stressed aggression should be considered a strategy of pathological adaptation, if a person uses it everywhere, in solving any problem, in a petrified way.
  Moreover, in this case he partially solves the problem set before him.
  In this case, one of the requirements of social-psychological adjustment is not met, the person is in conflict with others.
  At the same time, it should be noted that aggressive behavior should not always be considered deviant.
  Aggression can lead to deviant behavior or not.
  It is not at all necessary to accept the aggressive behavior shown by an individual and consider it as a pattern or element of deviant behavior.
 Aggression is a part of human nature and in some cases it plays a healthy adaptive role.
  Such is the case with defensive aggression, which is necessary to survive and adapt in the environment.
  Only exaggerated, extremely aggravated aggression can contradict moral and legal norms.
  According to some experts, at the same time, aggressive behavior can also be the result of a mental disorder or borderline condition.
  It should also be noted that antisocial behavior aimed at harming one's own person may be conditioned by unconscious self-aggression.
  As we know, aggression and aggressive behavior can not be absent from the life of a soldier.
  Let us take into account at least the fact that in their groups they sometimes express themselves with swear words, which already proves that aggression exists.
  It is another question what level of aggression is manifested in which military unit and in which units, and what is the ratio of the different types of aggression, physical aggression and verbal aggression, which can occur and contribute to deviant behavior or antisocial behavior.
 Since the age of conscripts corresponds to the adolescence-youth age group, we can say that it is necessary to pay great attention to the age-specific manifestations of soldiers' behavior.
  Knowledge of a soldier's physical and psychological characteristics (eg, physical strength, level of intellectual development, upbringing problems, etc.) allows the soldier to focus on understanding the motivation of his behavior, unwanted changes in behavior (if any) and try to correct them [ 2].
 As we know, military everyday life is completely different from civilian life.
  Accordingly, we can say that the forms of behavior manifested there are also different.
  The reason is that if the violation of certain limits and norms in civilian life is considered anti-social behavior, then in the conditions of military service the opportunities are even more limited and the military has very few opportunities to keep and feel free, to show different forms of behavior.
  This is the reason why we consider all the forms of behavior carried out in the conditions of military service, which do not correspond to the military, the norms of military behavior, the charter and the law of the Armed Forces, to be anti-social.
  424 PSYCHOLOGY The behavior of the representatives of the military sphere has always been and remains exemplary and typical.
  As a result of the method of observation and our daily observations, we will encounter a case when a serviceman allows himself an inadmissible act, during the discussion people around say that "it was not an act worthy of him."
  Any shortcoming arising from authoritarianism in this sphere and dictated by the fact that one considers oneself to be extremely important can be considered as a manifestation of deviant or anti-social behavior.
 According to K. Leonhard's deviant behavior also has anti-social elements, which is why it is sometimes generalized as a deviant behavior.
  If we compare the manifestations of deviant behavior in civilian life and in the conditions of military service, we can see significant differences.
  Manifestations of deviant behavior appear in various forms of behavior.
 The manifestations of deviant and anti-social behavior in the military sphere, the factors influencing them and other motivating circumstances are of interest to the representatives of the military sphere, as well as to military doctors, military psychologists, military police and other representatives of the related sphere.
 Numerous studies on this have revealed that the reason for the emergence and manifestation of deviant behavior in the conditions of military service can be the social environment, the psychological state of the soldier, being mentally bad, "unhealthy".
 There are some studies according to which the emergence of antisocial behavior leads to the development of a dysfunctional individual, his maladaptation.
  A serviceman with such a mental problem may engage in deviant behavior, such as leaving or not carrying out a combat order.
  It may not be done with a special intention, these actions may be uncontrollable by the consciousness, spontaneous, but nevertheless contrary to the norms of military law.
  Failure to carry out orders against the manifestations of anti-social behavior in military service, violence against a superior, insulting a serviceman, desertion, disciplinary violations
  The same manifestation of deviant and antisocial behavior can have different motives for each serviceman.
 There are cases when the servicemen carry out deviant behaviors, which need to be punished criminally.
  Servicemen are criminally liable for publicly dangerous acts envisaged by the RA Criminal Code, intentionally or negligently, which are directed against the established order of military service performed by servicemen, as well as the citizens included in the reserve who participate in training camps.
 In peacetime and in war, the soldier is responsible for the timely and correct performance of the duties assigned to him and the tasks assigned to him, as well as for the maintenance of weapons, equipment and equipment entrusted to him, otherwise punishment is inevitable.
 Military discipline is the strict and precise observance of the order defined by the laws of the Republic of Armenia, the military charter and the orders of the commanders.
  Its purpose is not to restrict the rights of servicemen, but to ensure the combat readiness of servicemen to fulfill the tasks faced by the RA Armed Forces.
  Military discipline is the realization of the military duty and personal responsibility of each serviceman.
 In order to achieve high discipline, first of all, it is necessary to use all the forms and methods of education among the servicemen, to carry out a great explanatory work, meaning that each serviceman has a unique temperament, psychology, level of consciousness and intellect.
  In terms of maintaining discipline, the commander's activities are assessed not by the number of penalties imposed by him, but by the strict observance of the law 426 PSYCHOLOGIES and military regulations.
 The word "discipline" in Latin means strict discipline.
  "Discipline is the strict and special observance of the order established by all servicemen by laws, military orders and commanders" [5; p. 167].
  It is necessary to make available to the consciousness of every soldier what is the significance and necessity of discipline.
  "The main significance of discipline is to turn a group of individuals into an organized team, which acts as a single entity, is aimed at achieving a common goal and is subject to a common will" [6; page 41].
 Soldiers usually do not take into account the danger of disorder.
  At first glance, it may seem that the lack of discipline is beneficial for the soldier.
  But it is only at first sight.
  The danger of lack of discipline should be explained to them immediately after joining the armed forces.
  They will not oppose discipline if they realize its significance and importance.
  When they see the sad consequences of lack of discipline, deviant or antisocial behavior.
  In general, the strict regulation of the military daily life, laconicism, the official style of construction of speech, implementation of actions, which at first sight seems formal, should be emphasized in every way.
  In this way, both the discipline and the sense of belonging to the whole are formed in the soldier, especially during joint actions.
  Both the order of subordination and the order of military honor are one of the cornerstones of military discipline.
  Moreover, not only fines and penalties defined by the disciplinary charter, but also criminal liability are envisaged for their violation.
 There are two types of discipline. group discipline and individual discipline.
  Regarding group discipline, Henderson says: "Mobility in the army with 427 PSYCHOLOGY is also at a very low level.
  Bringing a battalion with a thousand needles to the battlefield in time is not an easy task.
  The secret to success on the battlefield lies in the ability to accumulate overwhelming forces in a decisive direction, be they moral, material, or both. ”[4; page 49].
  The disciplined troops show great energy during the attack.
  Discipline is the basis of the morale of the troops.
  Accordingly, we can emphasize that if the army is disciplined, then the level of its anti-social behavior is low.
 In order to become a powerful fighting force, the army must be highly disciplined.
  And the guarding of the military unit is formed from the discipline of separate soldiers.
  The discipline of soldiers is achieved by punishing them for wrongdoing, but by exerting such influence on them that they desire to do what is right.
 If a soldier is repeatedly given orders that he is unable to carry out, he soon begins to fail to carry out even easier tasks.
  At first the soldier needs to be taught in detail what to do and only then to give orders.
  It should also be borne in mind that there are not only fast but also slower learning soldiers who need to be explained again and again what they are going to do.
  Each new trick with all its components needs to be taught in every detail.
  In such cases, the superior military will prevent the tendency of the soldier to show anti-social behavior.
 Many officers tend to ignore the details, sincerely hoping that the soldiers will understand and appreciate their friendly attitude and will not allow violations in more serious issues and will not resort to anti-social behavior.
  But it is a very dangerous delusion.
  If there are many serious disciplinary violations in the military unit, then it can be said with confidence that such minor violations as carelessness in wearing the uniform, lack of punctuality, etc. were not stopped in time.
  The rule of discipline's 428 PSYCHOLOGY is: "Take care of the details, and then you will not have complications in bigger problems" [5; page 50].
 Based on the above, we put forward the hypothesis that the high degree of aggression of a soldier is the basis for the formation of anti-social behavior.
  Research works were carried out in one of the military units of the RA Ministry of Defense with 260 conscripts in 2019. the period from January to April.
  In order to study and research this issue, an appropriate experimental diagnostic questionnaire was conducted: Bass-Perry Aggression Diagnosis Methodology (BPAQ) [1; page 91], a methodology for revealing the degree of tendency to deviant behavior according to E. V. Lacey [7].
 Our research with soldiers showed that the surveyed soldiers have both physical and verbal aggression (see Table 1).
  As we have already mentioned, the high index of aggression in the conditions of military service is not so surprising.
  It is not at all new that in military service they often use swear words, which is a manifestation of verbal aggression.
  We can not consider them completely negative, because sometimes this verbal aggression has a defensive role and prevents physical aggression and the conflict and the various deviant behaviors.
  In this case, we focus on physical aggression, the high rate of which can lead to antisocial behavior.
 Table 1. Bass-Perry Aggression Level Data Percentage High Moderate Low Physical Aggression Anger Hostility Verbal Aggression 12% PSYCHOLOGY If we compare the aggression of the subjects according to Bass-Perry and W. According to Lacey's methods, we will notice that we got a high degree of aggression through both methods.
  In Table 2, 48% of the respondents tended to show aggressive behavior, 25% to antisocial behavior, and 14% to addictive behavior.
 Table 2.% Antisocial behavior Delinquent behavior Addictive behavior Aggressive behavior Suicidal behavior As we can see, servicemen have a high level of aggression and a high level of tendency to aggressive behavior, which proves the validity of our hypothesis.
  The number of servicemen with a tendency towards deviance, aggressive and anti-social behavior will decrease during the period of military service, in case of maintaining order and discipline.
  The conditions of military service do not contribute to the behavior of the serviceman in such behaviors that are anti-social and do not comply with the social norms and the common charter.
  Conditions of military service do not facilitate the soldier to commit acts such as suicide, drunkenness, gambling and other anti-social behavior.
  The deviant behavior or disorder committed by the serviceman during the military service is directly related to the high degree of aggression of the person / soldier /, as a result of which the serviceman resorts to such behavior and is punished according to the act committed by him.
 Based on the results of the research, we can offer the following: To pay sufficient attention to the moral and psychological condition of the servicemen of the RA Armed Forces; to carry out with the aggressive servicemen of the Armed Forces.
 .
