It is a simple fact that the subject (object) of the fundamental right of a person and a citizen (we often find the concept of "content of fundamental rights" in the legal literature) is more difficult to determine than the subject and addressee of fundamental rights.
  This is due to a number of circumstances. the diversity of fundamental rights, the lack of a clear demarcation of the boundaries of the subject matter of fundamental rights, and so on.
  Therefore, we consider justified the approach in the legal literature that it is more expedient to present the subject of fundamental law in the light of the trinity of the holder of rights, the addressee and the function of fundamental law.
  [1, p. 192] It is well known that the respect and protection of human rights and freedoms is the responsibility of every democratic state governed by the rule of law, the primary goal of which is the pursuit of all civilized humanity today.
 In order to achieve this goal, states, as a rule, first of all enshrine human and civil rights in their legislations, emphasizing in particular the fundamental rights and freedoms and envisaging stable legal procedures and mechanisms for their effective realization.
 From this point of view, we think that the study of the structural elements of the basic human and civil rights (subject of the fundamental rights, object and addressee of the fundamental rights) is extremely important.
  In particular, in the framework of this article, we will refer to one of the most important issues of constitutional law - the clarification of the scope of the subject of fundamental rights, especially through the analysis of some fundamental rights enshrined in Chapter 2 of the Constitution, as amended in 2015.
 From the point of view of clarifying the content of fundamental rights and clarifying its boundaries, we think it is necessary to refer not only to the legal capacity of a person as a legal entity to "do" or "what", but also to the addressee of fundamental rights (Article 3, Part 3 of the Constitution, 2015 the question of "doing something" (ie actively intervening) or "refraining from taking any action" (ie not interfering) by force of public authority.
  This is due to the fact that this or that basic right of a person and a citizen corresponds to the responsibility of the state to ensure the realization of that right in one case by creating effective structures, guarantees (eg opening schools, educational centers for the realization of the right to education. ), in another case, not to hinder the exercise of the right (eg in the case of the right to life; the state is obliged to protect human life and not to commit illegal, arbitrary encroachments on it).
 Without trying to elaborate on the chain of mutual rights and responsibilities of a human being within the topic, it should be noted, however, that the basic and fundamental peculiarity of fundamental rights as a subjective public right is that the subject of that right gets the opportunity to demand and impose it on public authorities. a certain behavior (action or inaction), which is the content of fundamental rights.
  In other words, revealing the active and passive behavior of the public authorities aimed at the realization of fundamental rights allows talking about the content of fundamental rights.
  For example, by virtue of Articles 31, 32, 33 of the Constitution, as amended in 2015, everyone has the right to privacy and family life, to the inviolability of private and honorable life, to the inviolability of the apartment, to correspondence, to telephone conversations and to other forms of communication.
  This means that the public authority, in the person of the state authorities directly performing public functions, their officials, local self-government bodies, as well as private individuals who will perform any public function ordered by the state, [2, pp. 301-304 ] is obliged to refrain from interfering with the exercise of the above-mentioned rights (prohibition of unnecessary interference is guaranteed by Article 3 of the RA Basic Law, as well as the functions of fundamental rights. It should be noted that in contrast to the 2005 Constitution, Only in the grounds of the restriction of human rights provided for in Article 43 1 1, the amended Constitution was extended in 2005.The scope of value protected by Article 23 of the Constitution, including the protection of private and family life, as well as the protection of a person's honor and good reputation.
 43 JURISDICTION within the framework of status negativus), from committing any illegal act, as a result of which the rights to inviolability of privacy, privacy of persons may be unnecessarily restricted or violated.
  As for the limits of the status positivus, in that case the public authority, for the benefit of the subjective fundamental right holder, is obliged to exert an active influence in order for the latter to be able to effectively exercise this or that fundamental right.
  Thus, everyone has the right to judicial protection or the right to an independent, impartial and fair trial by an independent and impartial tribunal, and for the exercise of these rights the principal expects the establishment of impartial courts, effective justice, guarantee of lawfulness and independence of courts, etc. .
  The amended Constitution of the Republic of Armenia has made a progressive step in terms of expanding the protection of Article 63 of the Constitution.
 This right was also envisaged in 2005. Part 1 of Article 19 of the Constitution, but the content of Article 63 is broader and clearer.
  In the past, the right to a fair trial was linked to the purpose of restoring violated rights or finding out the merits of a criminal charge.
  The amended Constitution provides for the right of every person to a fair trial in any case, the scope of which is wider [3, p. 74].
 Thus, fundamental rights directly entitle a person to demand certain behavior from the public authorities. in one case to refrain from unnecessarily interfering with those rights, as well as, as an additional requirement to the State, to take active action to exercise its right.
  In other words, at the constitutional level, the negative and positive responsibilities of the state arising from the fundamental rights are fixed, which has two manifestations. On the one hand, the public authorities are obliged to "respect", on the other hand, 44 "JURISDICTION" is obliged to "protect" the basic rights and freedoms, which are considered the restraining link of the public authorities.
 The demand for respect for fundamental human rights obliges the public authorities to refrain from disproportionately interfering with the legal benefits protected by fundamental rights.
  The state should not torture people, deprive them of their lives unjustifiably, ban their freedom of expression inappropriately, arbitrarily close schools, illegally deprive them of their own property, and so on.
  And the obligation to protect fundamental rights presupposes active, positive actions to be taken by the state, the purpose of which is to guarantee and actively protect the goods protected by fundamental rights.
 Such positive responsibilities are reflected in the provision of services by public institutions (eg education, information, petitions), as well as the provision of legal protection (eg courts, proper administration).
  In addition, the state is obliged to prevent human rights violations and in each such case to conduct an effective investigation and punish the guilty.
 This allows us to talk about the legal status of the individual in the person-state relationship (status activus, status negativus, status positivus), as we have mentioned, the clarification of the boundaries of the subject of fundamental rights largely depends on the disclosure of the relevant behavior of public authorities.
  The doctrine, developed by the famous German scientist Georg Jelinek, has become a classic formula for the complete understanding of state-individual legal relations and has a starting point.
 Status negativus implies a demand to the state not to interfere with the exercise of its rights and freedoms.
  It describes in the most general way the sphere of citizen's freedom from the state, a sphere where the state should not invade unnecessarily.
 JURISDICTION In all areas where a person can not exercise his rights without the active participation of the state, it is a question of status positivus, because in this case the holder of fundamental rights has the opportunity to demand active actions from the state, for which the state invests certain material and administrative resources. .
  As for the status activus, it expresses the requirement to ensure the participation of the individual in the affairs of public administration and mainly refers to the sphere of the individual's participation in the internal political life of the state, e.g. rights to vote, to participate in the referendum, etc.
 Continuing to note that we unequivocally share the author's opinion that fundamental rights do not define what a person has the authority to do, but show the limits beyond which the state has no right to cross, because beyond them is already a person's freedom. It is the sphere where the state has nothing to do.
  In short, fundamental rights do not give freedom of action, but they protect that freedom from state interference.
  [4] And yes, there should be no misunderstanding. The fact that we often emphasize that by virtue of this or that article enshrined in Chapter 2 of the Constitution, which enshrines fundamental human rights, everyone has the right to "do something" or "do something" does not mean that The person has the rights only on the basis of being enshrined in the Constitution.
  At all, these rights are natural, pre-state and belong to a person by birth, regardless of the existence of the state.
  It should be noted that in all periods of human history the theories of natural and positive rights contradict each other, often even exclude each other.
  From ancient times the ideas of human rights, especially natural rights, were based on mythological ideas and were considered to be derived from divine justice.
  It was during this period that the idea of ​​the unity of justice, police and law was in force.
  Thus, the famous Roman law 46 JURISDICTION Ullinian believed that natural law teaches nature to the whole world.
  In contrast, Aristotle stated that individual rights are of a political nature and are possible only in the state.
  In detail, let us mention that according to the natural theory, a person is innately endowed with natural and inalienable rights and freedoms, and not the state grants such rights to a person.
 However, natural rights acquire the quality of a fundamental right through positivization, enshrined in a legal act, giving the right holder the legal capacity to defend himself.
  Therefore, only for the realization of positive rights can the subject of law expect certain behavior from the public authorities and only in case of violation of those rights has the possibility of judicial protection.
  Proof of this is the fact that man has the right to life, thought, conscience, not because the right to life or freedom of thought, conscience, religion is enshrined and guaranteed in the basic law, but because those rights belong to man by nature. a free-born creature.
  Just after it is enshrined in the Constitution, the addressee of the right, being limited by those rights, undertakes, for example, not to encroach on life, and in case of loss of life, to conduct an effective investigation and punish the guilty.
  In order to avoid misunderstandings, the Constitution of the Russian Federation shows an interesting approach from this point of view, according to which Article 17, Part 2 of the Constitution states that fundamental human rights and freedoms are inalienable and belong to everyone by birth.
 Continuing to develop the topic, we should mention that the disclosure of the subject of fundamental rights allows to receive information about the holder of the given fundamental right, its addressee and the values ​​to be protected.
  Analyzing the content of the constitutional article on the strike, it becomes clear that the Constitution has referred to the subject of this fundamental right, which in the sense of the first part recognizes the right to strike any employee who has the right to strike to protect his labor or socio-economic interests. reserving the definition of the order to the RA legislation), and the addressee to the state.
  By the way, the right to strike was envisaged separately only as a result of the amendments of 2015, as it is enshrined in Article 32, Part 3 of the Working Rights enshrined in the 2015 Constitution.
  As can be seen from the content of the article, the subject of this basic right, the interest protected by that right, is the socio-economic or labor interest of the employee.
  It is true that the article under consideration allowed us to get the information mentioned earlier (about the right holder, the addressee and the interest protected by that right), but determining the subject of certain fundamental rights in the Constitution, in particular from the point of view of the interest protected by that right, It is difficult and it should be noted that in such cases the legislator also has a lot to do to clarify the subject, as at the constitutional level it is simply impossible and pointless to detail all relations (for example, in the case of personal data protection right under Article 34 of the Constitution). The Constitution reserved the concretization to the legislator).
 In the legal literature we find the position that the subject of fundamental rights has positive (positive) and negative (negative) manifestations [5, p. 178].
 In the case of certain fundamental rights, however, the negative side is absent.
  The study of the content of fundamental rights allows us to conclude that the subject of fundamental rights has mainly positive manifestations, eg the right to move freely, to choose a place of residence, the right to express one's opinion, to organize gatherings and associate freely with others, to form trade unions and to join them.
  However, the subject of those 48 JURISDICTION rights also has a hidden negative side, which is manifested by not choosing a place of residence, not expressing an opinion, not organizing peaceful gatherings without weapons, and so on.
 A number of fundamental rights are enshrined in the Constitution in the form of negative manifestations, for example, no one can be subjected to torture, inhuman, degrading treatment or punishment.
  Or corporal punishment, eugenic experiments in the field of medicine and biology, profit from the use of human organs and tissues, reproductive human cloning are prohibited.
  No one may undergo scientific, medical or other experiments without his conscious and express consent.
 These are negative requirements not to interfere with the addressee of the right within the meaning of Article 3 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, which should not be confused with the negative side of the subject of fundamental rights, as the above requirements are addressed not to the holder of the right (as in the case of negative manifestation of the subject). to the addressee.
 Thus, it should be noted that there is no clear scope of the subject or object of the fundamental rights, it varies depending on the type of fundamental right.
  However, in all cases, its disclosure and study are extremely important from the point of view of clarifying the scope of the holder of the given right, the persons limited by that right.
  After all, the subject of fundamental rights is the action or inaction of the addressee of the fundamental rights aimed at the realization of those rights.
 .
