The psychological phenomenon of the national self-consciousness of the Artsakh Armenians is studied within the framework of a number of related social sciences and humanities.
  It presupposes a complete examination of the historical processes and complex processes of formation of the national collective "I" image, self-realization and socialization of the person, where various studies on the history, language, culture and mental structure of the Artsakh Armenians play a role. The discovery, which is expressed in the feeling of being part of the historical homeland.
 In this respect, some foreign sources on the national description of the Caucasian population are interesting.
  K. H. Ghahramanyan and A. Ս. Ghaziyan "Nagorno Karabakh Republic. The book "The Origins of Statehood" mentions the general opinion circulating in the official sources of Tsarist Russia about the national description of the peoples living in the Caucasus, in the context of which they consider the manifestations of the national identity of the Armenians of Artsakh.
  According to this opinion, the sources of the Georgian peoples of the beginning of the last century are considered closed and backward, which "play no role for the Caucasus" [1, p. 45].
  The Caucasian Tatars, who lead a semi-nomadic, semi-nomadic life, are described as follows: "Azerbaijani Tatars are vindictive and ignorant, prone to deception, theft and robbery, due to which they are evil for the peoples living in 100" [1, p. 46; see 6, p. 837-838].
  In contrast to the description of the above-mentioned peoples, in the same sources we find the following assessments given to the Armenians. "Armenians show a great inclination towards European education and engaging in trade and industry.
  Their national feeling is very strongly developed.
  Due to their entrepreneurial and trade orientation, urban Armenians have monopolized almost all trade and industry in the Caucasus, a significant part of the population of which is completely dependent on them ”[1, p. 46; see 6, p. 838].
  K. H. Ghahramanyan and A. Ս. This observation by Ghaziyan is very important for understanding both the strategy underlying Tsarist Russia's national discriminatory policy aimed at leading economically stable and pro-independence Armenians and the imperial aspirations to weaken the "strong national feeling" of prominent Armenians.
  In contrast, the national sense of identification with their land, which is the basis of national self-consciousness, was gradually strengthening among Armenians.
 Administratively, the territory of Artsakh, passing to the Russian Empire in the first quarter of the 19th century, formed the districts of Shushi, Jevanshir and Jabrail of the Elizavetpol prefecture.
  It was always considered an inseparable part of historical Armenia and is presented in the sources with its Armenianness.
  With the sovietization of the region, Nagorno-Karabakh became part of Soviet Armenia (July 3, 1921), and a few days later (July 5, 1921) by the decision of the Caucasus Bureau, it was unexpectedly ceded to Soviet Azerbaijan, given the uncertainty of "national solidarity between Armenians and Muslims." the reasoning.
  Thus, the territory of Artsakh inhabited by 95% Armenians, without proper administration and taking into account the historical, socio-economic and psychological aspects of the problem, was annexed to Soviet Azerbaijan, becoming administratively an autonomous region of Nagorno Karabakh [see 3, pp. 18-21].
  And although the Armenians of Artsakh throughout the 20th century tried to raise the issue of reunification of the USSR (early 1920s, 1945, 1967, 1977) [3, pp. 18-21], nevertheless the solution to the problem was the Soviet Union. The dynamics of serious social, psychological and civil-legal transformation processes initiated by the policy of reconstruction in
 Now we will present the dynamics of domestic and international perceptions on the current state of the Artsakh problem and the impact of those perceptions on the development of the national self-consciousness of the Artsakh Armenians.
 As D. rightly states. Babayan, raising the issue of Artsakh and, moreover, declaring independence, continues to be unacceptable for the 101 Hanra states of Azerbaijan, as it poses a serious threat to its own existence, addressing the issue of ethno-political identity of Azerbaijanis [5, pp. 22-31].
  A situation has been created in Azerbaijan when the idea of ​​the identity of one nation is formed by excluding the independence of another nation.
  In other words, the fact of self-determination of one nation in that country is perceived as a circumstance denying the right of self-determination of another nation.
  The author addresses this issue based on the peculiarities of the formation of the Azerbaijani nation and identity.
  In particular, the fact that the process of formation of the Azerbaijani ethnos began in the 30s of the 20th century, when the consolidation of Muslim nations was based on a sense of belonging to a common administrative territory.
 Representatives of different nationalities were identified by the "Azerbaijani" ethnonym as residents of Azerbaijan.
  For the people of Azerbaijan, this was the only possible way to form elements of national self-consciousness, as the name "Azerbaijan" was not associated with any people inhabiting the country and forming a majority [5, pp. 23-24].
  Thus, the author mentions the Lezgins, Talyshs, Tatars, Kurds, mountainous and Turkic nations from the Azerbaijani nationalities.
  Gradually the central role of national consolidation passed to the Turkic ethnos and the "Azerbaijani" ethnonym began to be identified with the representatives of that nationality, as a result of which other Azeri nations developed the perception that Azeris of Turkic origin impose on other peoples their national consolidation and self-consciousness. 24].
  This is the hidden negative attitude of Azerbaijan towards the Artsakh issue.
  Along with Artsakh's self-determination and independence, the foundations of Azerbaijan's national consolidation are being endangered, and precedents are being set for the Artsakh Armenians to repeat the example of other Azerbaijani nationalities (Lezgins, Talysh, etc.).
 Let us now consider some peculiarities of the national self-consciousness of the Artsakh Armenians.
 H. reports interesting material on the development of national self-consciousness. Marutyan in his "Armenian Genocide. Historical memory and the transformation of stereotypes according to the posters of the Karabakh movement ”[2, pp. 22-24].
  The information on the posters is invaluable for observing the whole process of the Karabakh movement, for describing the dynamics of the development of national self-consciousness, as these posters characterize the demands of the protesters in Artsakh and guide the course of the Karabakh movement.
  The author rightly mentions the increase in the number of Armenian-language posters along with the expansion of the Karabakh 102 movement, compared to foreign-language posters at the beginning of the movement.
 This means that if at the beginning of the movement the posters were addressed to the outside world, then gradually the information in the posters becomes Armenian, being targeted at the population of Artsakh.
  We describe this phenomenon as a "syndrome of national consolidation", which is characterized by appropriate factors of psychological protection.
 The term can be interpreted in two ways, according to external and internal sources of consolidation.
  When the means of expression of national consolidation are directed to the outside world and are described through foreign language announcements, posters, information accessible to the outside world, an image of the external syndrome of national consolidation is formed.
  In the context of the internal consolidation syndrome, the society is under the influence of social-psychological factors, which are addressed primarily to the population and are limited to the internal information field [see 7].
  It is also possible to single out a type of factor that is addressed to both external and internal audiences in terms of the direction of its impact.
  It should also be noted that the phenomenon of national consolidation syndrome registered during the ceasefire in Artsakh still retains its social-psychological impact, receiving new forms and means of expression [see 8].
 Let us mention some factors of manifestation of the described phenomenon in the current Artsakh society.
 The first of the factors refers to the situation "without war, without reconciliation", about which L. expressed an opinion. Harutyunyan [4, pp. 542-549; 5, pp. 21-24].
  The author refers to the fact that two of the possible ways for the development of a society in a situation "without war, without reconciliation" are considered realistic and modern.
  One of the ways outlines the possibility of resumption of hostilities and confrontation, and the other the vision of building and maintaining peace.
 At this stage, the people of Artsakh found themselves in a border situation, when it seems that the danger of resumption of large-scale hostilities has eased, but, nevertheless, it cannot be said that a lasting peace has been achieved.
  In such conditions, the change or transformation of various socio-political and psychological factors can lead to either military or reconciliation solutions to the situation.
  The author also mentions 103 factors of social development in such borderline, intermediate conditions of the society, which are directed to the conclusion of future reconciliation and the resolution of the situation.
  These factors include: • the development of ways to end or transform the conflict; • the weakening of the image of the "enemy" and the potential for violence; • the identification of reconciliation structures; • the formation of civil society and democratic principles [4, pp. 542-549].
 The fact of expansion of the country's defense structures is of special importance among the conflict-based bases of the "no war, no reconciliation" society in Artsakh.
  Undoubtedly, the presence of these structures itself contributes to the maintenance of the ceasefire and the peace of the population, but, nevertheless, let us mention another perception of the defense institutions. The more attention is paid to the country's defense structures, the stronger the fear among the population that the danger of resumption of real hostilities has not yet passed, and the society is still in a state of "no peace."
 In addition to the above, let us mention another factor, the existence of which strengthens the existence of a "no reconciliation" construct in the population.
  The point is that the Armenians of Artsakh, who are in the current borderline socio-psychological situation, have been left out of the opportunity to actively participate in the negotiations on the Artsakh issue for many years, as a result of which people have formed the opinion that they do not own their destiny.
 In the current situation, the fact that it is not a full-fledged subject of negotiations also strengthens the perception of the society to survive "without reconciliation".
 Let us also refer to the factors that appear in contrast to conflictogenic psychological constructs.
  First of all, it is necessary to mention the factor of democratic institutions developing inside the country.
  It is obvious that the Armenians of Artsakh have chosen the path of introducing democratic mechanisms organizing political, socio-economic and psychological way of life, which is a telling fact from the point of view of the development of the society and its presentation to the world.
  These developments, aiming at the development of administrative forms inside the country and the formation of a socially-psychologically relaxed, progressive atmosphere, of course, also have the meaning of presenting themselves to the international community as a progressive, democratic political unit.
  Such a representation automatically presupposes a response from the outside world, which undertakes to resolve this border situation in Artsakh "without war, without peace" with similar democratic principles, in favor of a "no war" position.
 Conclusion The examination of the above-mentioned social-psychological factors allows concluding about the possibilities of bipolar development of societies "without war, without peace" in the person of Artsakh.
  Moreover, the choice of the "no reconciliation" position may be conditioned not only by external factors, but also by the presence and modernization of such psychological factors as modernization of the "enemy" image, preservation of the country's defense structures, public participation in international negotiations, possible danger. the uncertainty of long-term expectation, the unsatisfaction of the growing social needs in the conditions of socio-economic isolation, the underdevelopment of the internal consolidation syndrome.
 .
