During the last ten years, violations of the right to a fair trial have been registered more often by law enforcement officers, as well as lawyers working in the field of human rights protection, which is not because more than all other violations, but due to the content of the term. by nature.
  In the context of this article, only one component of the right to a fair trial has been discussed, which seems simple and comprehensible, but within the framework of legal analysis it is constantly subjected to various refinements, which widen the semantic scope of the term, which determines the relevance of the Article.
  It is about the publicity of the case examination in court.
  The purpose of this article is to clarify the scope of existence of the case, which is highlighted in the case law of the European Court of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as the European Court of Justice or the High Court) in the actual application of the term, based in each case on the facts of the case.
  The task was to find out whether the current legislation of the Republic of Armenia ensures the application of the criterion of publicity of the examination of the case as a guarantee of the right to a fair trial.
 The requirement of publicity of cases is enshrined in Article 6 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the Convention) ratified by the Republic of Armenia on 26.04.2002, according to which everyone, when their civil rights and responsibilities are determined, or any criminal has the right to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law.
  The verdict is announced in open court, but the presence of the press and the public may not be allowed throughout the trial or in part in the interests of morality, public order or state security in a democratic society, when the interests of minors or the privacy of the parties so require. insofar as it is, in the opinion of the court, absolutely necessary due to special circumstances, if publicity would violate the interests of justice.
 It is known from the theory that any rule has its exception.
  From the above we can conclude that ensuring a public, in other words, open trial is the rule, and besides, everything is the exception to the rule.
 The guarantee of publicity in the domestic legal system of the Republic of Armenia was enshrined in all editions of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia in 2015. Edited by Article 63, 2005 Edited by Article 19 and 1995 Edited by Article 39.
 JURISDICTION As a guarantee of the right to a fair trial, the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia (2015) stipulates that everyone has the right to a fair, public and reasonable trial by an independent and impartial court.
 The principle of publicity is, perhaps, the criterion of the right to a fair trial, for the direct effect of which the sectoral legislations have provided private regulations, thus ensuring the legal effect of the constitutional guarantee.
  The provisions of Article 11 (publicity of court proceedings) of the RA Constitutional Law "Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia" serve as a guideline for sectoral legislations.
  The sectoral rights of publicity are enshrined in Articles 8 of the RA Administrative Procedure Code, 17 of the RA Civil Procedure Code, 16 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code.
 Despite the existence of such a framework of legal norms, in practice a number of problems arise, some of which are related to the assessment of the criterion of publicity itself, and the other part to the assessment of exceptions to the legal requirement in each case.
 However, before discussing the issues arising in the case law of the Republic of Armenia, let us refer to the case law of the European Court, which, as a result of the years, has formed criteria for ensuring the right to publicity of the case.
 Although the European Court of Human Rights has ruled in a number of cases that the publicity of a case is a fundamental right to public scrutiny, which builds public confidence in the courts, Article 6 of the European Convention also imposes certain restrictions.
 The High Court noted that there may be a need to restrict the publicity of the investigation during criminal proceedings, for example to ensure the security and confidentiality of a witness [16, p. 22] or, 95 JURISDICTION, based on the effectiveness of justice, to freely exchange some information and opinions [20, p. 30].
 The European Court also emphasized the approach that domestic courts should seek to balance conflicts of interest by ensuring secrecy, open justice and freedom of the press [1, pg. 326].
 In one of its judgments, the European Court established another circumstance to be assessed, according to which, in order to confirm the compliance of the trial with the convention requirements of publicity, it is necessary to consider the individual episodes of the proceedings as a whole [13, p. In one of the cases, according to the case, when the court hearings took place on the territory of a penitentiary institution, the European Court noted that the European Court aims to guarantee not theoretical or illusory rights, but rights that are feasible and effective.
  The court stated that the condition of publicity will be observed when the public has the opportunity to obtain information about the place and time of the court session and to be able to attend the session freely.
  The court found that in many cases this requirement is met only for the simple reason that the hearings take place in a sufficiently large courtroom.
  The court noted that holding the court session outside the court building, and in the territory of the penitentiary institution, which, as a rule, is not accessible to the public, is a significant obstacle in terms of publicity of the case [26, p. 29].
  Therefore, the Supreme Court also considers it essential to have theoretical and factual access to the venue of the court session, which is also a criterion for assessing compliance with the publicity requirement.
 The European Court has considered as essential criteria for the principle of publicity the method of examination of the case (written or oral examination), the procedure for publishing judicial acts, which is directly enshrined in Article 6 96 96 of the Convention on Jurisprudence, as well as access to media for examination.
 JUDICIAL HEARINGS The European Court has held that the right to a "public hearing" in the first and only instance presupposes the right to an "oral hearing" [19, p. 21].
  At the same time, another decision stated that the requirement of "oral hearings" may not be met due to some exceptional circumstances, which justify not holding such hearings [22, p. 29].
 The European Court has also established cases in which failure to provide an "oral hearing" cannot lead to a violation of Article 6 of the Convention.
  In particular, the obligation to provide an "oral hearing" is not absolute and may not apply to cases where, for example, there are no issues of fact or law which cannot be resolved by a court on the basis of the case and the parties' arguments [17, p. 37].
  In parallel with the above, the European Court also noted the exact opposite situation, when, regardless of everything, the court is obliged to provide "oral hearings" to clarify issues raised by law and other factual circumstances [18, p. 44] or when it is necessary to hear the explanations of the party about the situation concerning him, in person or through a representative [22, p. 34].
 Thus, the requirement to hold an "oral hearing" as a component of a public hearing is not absolute; it may be applied by certain circumstances due to restrictions, such as the "simple" circumstances of the case, as well as questions of applicable law, court They do not appear.
 MEDIA Article 6 of the Convention does not exclude the principle of openness to judicial review and lays down certain jurisprudential restrictions, the implication of which is that all or part of a hearing shall be open to the public.
  The latter must take into account the importance of protected social values, both for the individual and for society and the state.
  In any case, that decision must be reasoned.
  The only reason for holding a non-public trial is that publicity can damage morality. public order, national security, the interests of minors, private life and the interests of justice.
  These grounds are of an evaluative nature, and therefore states have the opportunity to exercise a certain discretion [3, p. 298].
 In limiting the presence of members of the media and the public in the case, the Convention provides a range of cases that take precedence over the right to publicity, in particular 1) morality in a democratic society, 2) public order, 3) state security, 4) the interests of minors (eg children). cases of residence or care [14, p. 38], 5) protection of the private life of the parties (for example, cases related to professional secrecy and thus the life of another person [15, p. 34], 6) the interests of justice.
 In any case where the publicity of the case is restricted on any grounds, there must be a clear and reasoned reasoning, otherwise the situation cannot be considered compatible with Article 6 of the Convention.
 In one of the cases against Russia, according to the factual circumstances of which the case was of great public interest and the number of people present at the hearings was large, the entrance to the courtroom was blocked by those who wished to be present did not have notices to attend the hearing or no identity documents. .
  Such reasoning was considered insufficient by the European Court of Jurisprudence and found a violation of Article 6 of the Convention [27, p. 26].
 Referring to the "interest of justice", the High Court noted that even in criminal cases where there is a greater expectation of publicity, Article 6 of the Convention may require restricting open and public proceedings, such as to protect the security and confidentiality of a witness or the need for justice. to ensure the free exchange of information and opinions [24, p. 45].
 The European Court also referred to the possibility of waiving the right to a public hearing, stating that Article 6 does not prevent a person from voluntarily giving up a public hearing [21, p. 59].
 PUBLICATION OF JUDGMENT As a result of a simple reading of Article 6 of the Convention, it becomes obvious that the requirement to publish judicial acts has the absolute wording: "... The judgment shall be announced in open court, ...".
 In fact, the Convention did not provide for exceptions to the publication of the judgment, moreover, the European Court did not set any specific exceptions by precedent.
 Despite the clarity of such wording, the European Court has not ruled out, in addition to reading the judgment at the hearing, the compatibility of other methods of publication with Article 6 of the Convention [23, p. 101].
  At the same time, referring to the compatibility of the different methods of publication of the judgment with Article 6 of the Convention, the European Court noted that in each case, under national law, the forms of publication must be assessed in the light of certain features of the proceedings, with reference to Article 6 1 1. the subject and purpose of the point [25, p. 26].
 99 JURISDICTION One of the judges of the European Court of Justice, Lucas Lousaides (term 1998-2008, Cyprus) raised a question in his book about the publication of judgments in closed trials.
  In this regard, the latter referred to the evidence presented during the closed court hearings, emphasizing the issue of making it public as a result of their reflection in the Judgment.
 The author made a comparison with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Article 14), which clearly stated the circumstances precluding the publication of the judgment1.
  In this regard, the author expressed the opinion that the decision made as a result of closed court hearings should not include complete information, in particular names, other information with which it is possible to identify the person, should avoid information about the family life of the person, but so that it does not affect On the analysis and conclusions of the court, which is subject to publication and which, in fact, should be subject to public scrutiny [2, pg. 220-221].
 The issue raised by the mentioned author is regulated by the RA legislation, but not by the procedural legislation, but by the decision of the RA Supreme Judicial Council, in connection with which a more detailed opinion is presented below.
 As a result of the discussion of the precedent decisions referred to above, it becomes clear that the legal norm of the publicity of the examination of the case is a comprehensible legal regulation, but in the process of application it leads to different and also opposing approaches.
 Summarizing the above-mentioned legal interpretations of the European Court and referring to the observance of the requirement of "oral hearings" and the article cited in the case, "... but any judicial decision in a criminal or civil case must be public, except in cases where the interests of minors If the matter is related to marital disputes or child custody. ”
 100 JURISDICTION In order to consider the criterion of racial assessment, we consider it necessary to discuss the issues arising in the legal practice of the Republic of Armenia.
 The RA Constitutional Court on 11.04.2012 Referring to the legal regulation of Article 138 of the RA Administrative Procedure Code by the previous edition, he concluded that “even in the case of written examination of cases, the participants in the trial (including the parties) are not constrained to exercise their procedural rights and bear relevant responsibilities. have been implemented, taking into account the specifics of the written examination, in particular in cases where the issue relates to the performance of legal proceedings and the rights and responsibilities of the participants related to it.
 Therefore, the Constitutional Court finds that the application of these features does not change the main normative essence of the rights and responsibilities of the participants.
  In other words, as follows from the above-mentioned analysis, in the case of a written procedure, the legislator guaranteed the observance of the rules of competitive trial.
  Judicial acts made by such a procedure, as follows from the content of the above-mentioned norms, are unconditionally subject to both publication and official publication.
  That is, the full texts of those acts are in principle made available in the same way as they would be presented as a result of oral hearings.
  At the same time, as a result of the written trial, the adoption and publication of the acts are followed by the necessary legal consequences provided by law, which are accessible and assessable for both the litigants and the public, and these acts are subject to review in accordance with the rules.
 By the same decision, the Constitutional Court made another precise conclusion, according to which "the publicity of the trial, first of all, means the possibility of exercising public control over the trial and the acts adopted by the court."
 We consider that the above conclusion is justified and can be interpreted in the context of the margin of appreciation of a Member State, and is therefore compatible with the requirement of publicity of the case under Article 6 of the European Convention.
 At the same time, we consider it important to celebrate 2018. The regulations of the RA Civil Procedure Code, according to which the procedure of written examination in the RA Civil Court of Appeal was envisaged, or 21.12.2017. The amendment made to the RA Civil Procedure Code (Chapter 19.1), which was later preserved in 2018. with the simplified procedure of cases related to the Code (Chapter 41), according to the regulations of which, if certain requirements set by the Code are met, the court may decide to consider the case through the simplified procedure, in which case a court session is not convened, but the court is fully able to exercise its rights. defense by presenting evidence, positions,
 At the moment of elaboration of this article, the draft law of the Republic of Armenia “On Making Amendments and Addenda to the Code of Administrative Procedure of the Republic of Armenia” is in circulation [12], which envisages regulations for the application of simplified proceedings.
  In case of adoption of this draft, the RA Code of Administrative Procedure will be supplemented with another legal instrument to examine the case through a written procedure, without convening a court session.
 It follows from the above that the current regulations of the Republic of Armenia, according to which the procedure of written examination is provided during the trials, do not constitute an abuse of the right to "oral hearings", but on the contrary, due to their existence ensures a fair justice within a reasonable time. »Ensuring the requirement of examination of the case.
 In other words, it follows from the above that the replacement of "oral hearings" by a written examination of the case does not contradict the requirement of a public examination of the case, because as the RA Constitutional Court noted, such a "collision is presumed", and in fact there is no actual conflict of norms. , if other features of the principle of publicity are preserved in the conditions of the written examination, then the principle does not cease to apply.
 By saying other features, we must first mean the unimpeded protection of the rights of the litigants within the framework of the principle of competition, which is a guarantee of a fair trial, as well as the publication of the judicial act, its acquaintance by the parties and its accessibility to the public.
  In this regard, however, we consider it necessary to refer to the 10th part of Article 11 of the RA Constitutional Law "Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia", on the basis of which the RA Supreme Judicial Council on 27.09.2019 Decision No. BDK-40-O-105 on the procedure for the personalization of personal data in judicial acts published on the official website of the judiciary was adopted, which is already compatible with the provisions of Article 8 of the European Convention (right to respect for private and family life) and legally restricts Article 6 of the Convention. Absolute application of Article.
  Therefore, in this regard we can say that the current legal regulations of the Republic of Armenia are clear enough and exhaustive from the point of view of the entire legal toolkit.
 Thus, after studying the article, we come to the conclusion that despite the fact that the European Court has set criteria for assessing the requirement of publicity, which should be considered in each case, the actual application of the legal norms discussed and comments in each case is pending. margin of appreciation, because in the context of the scope and / or application of a legal norm, the courts are the institutional body that has the authority to determine the limits of publicity in each case, the scope of possible exceptions to the norm, and thus the scope of statehood. decision-making body.
 .
