The 2016 World Economic Forum in Davos was marked by the development of education issues.
  Discussing the skills and abilities of education professionals, the most relevant skills for 2020 were identified: finding comprehensive solutions to problems, making decisions appropriate to judgments, working together, negotiating, showing critical thinking, creativity, human resource management, emotional stability, cognitive flexibility (Davos, 2016).
  Critical thinking and emotional intellect are especially important for future professionals.
 37 Armenian scholars, in accordance with their theoretical assumptions and empirical research, single out the following skills of chess teachers: knowledge of the subject, communication and communication, choice of teaching strategies and methods, thinking skills, goal planning and setting, teaching skills: understanding students' needs, classroom management and motivation. evaluation (Sargsyan, Khachatryan, 2019, p. 12).
  V. Sargsyan and H. Khachatryan particularly emphasizes the need for a chess teacher to be able to "think critically".
  According to the authors, "critical thinking" means to discuss information, to discuss knowledge comprehensively, to analyze, compare, modify, as a result, to reach a certain position, to accept or deny it.
  Moreover, such a teacher not only manifests those qualities himself, but also develops them in his students ”(Sargsyan, Khachatryan, 2019, p. 15).
 Ս. Khachatryan considers the peculiarities of the "Chess" subject, in which its general educational value is manifested.
 In particular, according to the author, chess contributes to the focus of students, the formation of organizational qualities, the ability to take the steps of others and the development of critical thinking.
  According to S. According to Khachatryan, the chess teacher should consider critical thinking as the ultimate goal (Khachatryan, 2019, p. 12).
 The ultimate goal of critical thinking is to develop the skills to analyze the situation, make decisions and solve problems.
  Critical thinkers base their conclusions on facts rather than emotions.
  They are able to analyze their own judgments, identify gaps and predict consequences, generally refining their ideas (Murawski, 2014; Lundquist, 1999).
 In the 21st century, the competitive labor market really emphasizes the role of teachers with critical thinking in the education and upbringing of the generation.
  However, the demand for "keeping" and motivating teachers who think critically in the education system has increased, and employers also realize its importance.
 In the last decade, many theories have been developed to characterize work motivation, which largely study the needs of the individual, their impact and role on the motivational field of work.
 In order to record and reveal the level of critical thinking of chess teachers with "best experience" in school teaching and its components, as well as the level of work motivation, in 2019 a team of psychologists from 38 Chess Research Institutes conducted an experimental study.
 The experimental research was carried out in the following sequential stages: 1. Development of video-methodological bases of the research 2. Selection of research methods, experimental application, adaptation 3. Carrying out scientific research work 4. Analysis of the obtained data, formulation of conclusions and practical recommendations The video-methodological bases of the research are: 1. Լ. Murauski and R. Landquist Theoretical Provisions on Critical Thinking (Murawski, 2014, 2. F. Herzberg's Theory of Job Motivation Research Staff Experimental research was conducted in Kotayk region among a total of 45 chess teachers.
  The subjects from different schools of Kotayk region were selected according to the following criteria: 1. Expert assessment 2. Accreditation results The methods of experimental research are: 1. Critical Thinking Questionnaire (author's elaboration) While compiling the Critical Thinking Author Questionnaire, we relied on L. Murauski and R. On the theoretical propositions of Landquist critical thinking (Murawski, 2014; Lundquist, 1999).
 2. F. Herzberg "Motivational Structure Test" (Herzberg, 2010).
 Achieved scientific results Below we present the current level of manifestation of each of the components of critical thinking of chess teachers during their professional activity, according to the average data. 1. Acceptance of personal limitations - 60%, 2. Consideration of problems as a challenge - 40%, 3. Awareness of the importance of the goal - 55%, 4. Use of evidence to make a decision - 45%, 5. Interest in the thoughts of others - 55%, 6 Acceptance of changes - 30%, 7. Rejection of stereotypes - 40%, 8. Avoidance of emotions - 30%, 9. Acceptance of new ideas - 35%, 10. Ability to actively listen - 45%.
 39 In order to make the indicators of the components of critical thinking more visible, we present them in a diagram (See Figure 1).
 Active Listening Acceptance of New Thoughts Avoiding Emotions Rejecting Stereotypes Accepting Change Accepting Others' Thoughts Applying Evidence Recognizing the Importance of Purpose Looking at Challenges Accepting Personal Limitations Figure 1. Current Level of Critical Thinking Components of Research 62% of the 45 chess teachers surveyed using the questionnaire are more critical (See Figure 2).
 Critical Thinking Non-Critical Thinking Figure 2. Critical Analysis of the Critical Thinking Questionnaire 40 Before planning and conducting the research, the following question was important for our research team: How motivated are the chess teachers with the best teaching experience, and especially during their work? What are the motives?
  Aiming to reveal the level of work motivation of chess teachers with "best experience" of teaching at school, we used F. Herzberg's "Motivational Structure Test", which aims to identify the set of motives that dominate the structure of work motivation (Herzberg, 2010).
 F. Herzberg's two-factor theory is based on two major groups of needs. external and internal.
  External factors are related to the environment in which the work is performed, and internal factors are related to the nature of the work.
 F. Herzberg called the first group of requirements hygienic, using the medical meaning of the word "hygiene" (warning).
  According to him, these factors determine the working environment and may have a primary function of dissatisfaction with work.
  Hertzberg called the second group of requirements motivators or facilitators who motivate the best performance of work.
  It should be noted that Herzberg concluded as a result of his research that salary is not a motivating factor for work activity and is in the first group (Herzberg, 2010).
 Table 1. Job Motivation Structure by F. Herzberg External Motives Management Policy Working Conditions Salary Amount and Social Status Interpersonal Relationships with Team Leadership Motivation Internal Success Career Progress Acceptance of Job Outcomes Research and Encouragement , that in the work motivation of chess teachers the internal, motivating motives prevail over the external.
  It is interesting that the external motives - the policy of the leadership, working conditions, interpersonal relations with the leadership, the amount of salary and social status make a small percentage - 25%.
 41 To make the results more visible, present them in tabular form (See Table 2).
 them Table 2. F. Current level of Herzberg motivational structure test components Internal motives Factors External motives Average points Factors Average points Job content 19.8 Teamwork 16,2667 Personal achievement Relationships 18,93333 Public relations Recognition 11,7333 Financial incentives Employment 15,4667 responsibility Thus, we can conclude that F. As a result of the Herzberg Motivational Structure Test, about 75% of the 45 chess teachers surveyed were dominated by internal and 25% by external motives (See Figure 2).
 Figure 3. The structure of chess teachers' work motivation according to F. Herzberg.
 Analysis of Motivational Structure Test Results Internal Motives External Motives 42 Based on the results of an experimental study, we conclude that teachers with the best experience in teaching chess accept their personal limitations in their professional activities, realize the importance of purpose, are interested in others' thoughts and are able to listen actively. .
  This testifies to their ability to think critically. At the same time, it was revealed that teachers with the best experience of teaching chess in their professional activities attach special importance to career advancement, success, acceptance and encouragement of work results, responsibility, opportunity for creative and professional growth.
  This shows that regardless of the salary and social status, teachers are especially guided by internal motives.
 We strongly believe that the presence of the above-mentioned professional skills of teachers with "best experience" in teaching chess contributes to the efficiency of the educational process.
 Therefore, emphasizing the importance of disseminating "best practice" in teaching chess, our research team is currently developing a "Best Practice" model for teaching chess teachers, aimed at shaping the basic skills and components of a 21st century teacher.
 .
