Without exaggeration, Europe has always played an important role in the development of human history, civilization and its progress.
  And regardless of the fact that the history of Europe and its peoples is "rich" also with wars and conflicts, the unifying factor that unites Europe has been dominant over the years.
  The leaders of this idea were the equally leading and great thinkers of different European countries and peoples, who felt the need for it better than others and constantly preached this idea, which over time became acceptable to all.
 Among them are such thinkers as Voltaire (1694-1778), Jean-Jacques Rousseau (17121778), Saint-Simon (1760-1825), Victor Hugo (1802-1885) and many others.
  Voltaire in 1751 He put forward the idea that Europe seems to be a republic, divided by the mixed forms of government of separate states ... but all of them are interconnected (4, p. 9).
 And Victor Hugo in 1849. He was optimistic that the day would come when all the nations of the continent would unite and form a European brotherhood without losing their identity or their glorious personality. — 2, p. 9.
 The idea of ​​a united Europe became a more vital and political necessity after the Second World War.
  Lessons needed to be learned from the past, especially since in the 20th century, humanity was plunged into two successive world wars, causing enormous, tens and tens of millions of casualties and just as much devastation and deprivation.
 It is no coincidence that the 20th century is also considered to be the bloodiest era in human history.
  It is also not accidental that the leaders of the idea of ​​uniting Europe became Germany and France, which had fought more against each other over the centuries.
 The first Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany (Germany) Konrad Adenhauer (1949-1963) and the President of France Charles de Gaulle (1958-1969) came to an agreement and in 1963, signed a friendship agreement, which became one of the guidelines for the unification of Europe.
 The same idea of ​​European unification was put forward by the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of England Winston Churchill (1940-1945) and (1951-1955), who in 1946. In his famous speech at the University of Zurich, he expressed the idea that 343 HISTORY is a means that ... can make Europe ... free and ... happy in a few years.
  It is the re-creation of the European family ...
  We, Churchill noted, must build a "United States of Europe" (2, p. 15).
 The idea of ​​European unification was later put on a more practical footing by figures such as Robert Schuman and Jean Monnet, who are considered the spiritual fathers of the creation of the European Union.
  Robert Schumann, who in 1948-1952. He was the Minister of Foreign Affairs of France in 1950. On May 9, 1959, together with Jean Monnet (French economist, who was the first executive chairman of the European Coal and Steel Community from 1952 to 1955), he compiled and published the famous Schuman Plan.
  By the way, that day is also considered the birthday of the European Union.
 The author of the plan, Schumann, suggested that European states jointly manage the production of coal and steel, which could be a guarantee of peace.
  The idea was endorsed by German Chancellor Konrad Adenhauer and the governments of France, Italy, Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands.
 1951 In April, the six European countries signed the European Coal and Steel Community Agreement.
 Jean Monnet, convinced that by this step they were uniting not the European states, but the European peoples, also believed that by doing so Europe could also prevent the recurrence of wars and guarantee stability and peace (2, pp. 9. 11, 13). , 14, 18).
 Such an initiative also aimed to unite a figuratively "shattered" Europe into one whole, which was based on such universal values ​​as human rights, democracy, the rule of law, the pursuit of a prosperous life, the spiritual community, and so on.
 Such ideas tend to spread, to be imitated by others.
  It is not by chance that being like Europe, communicating with those 344 HISTORY values, became a demand for many peoples, because it helps to preserve one's own, national, to get richer in mutual contacts.
 European values ​​and spiritual connection with Europe have always been close to the heart of the Armenian people.
  These opportunities became more active after the collapse of the USSR and the independence of the Republic of Armenia, when the Armenian people had the opportunity to choose their future and their destiny more freely and independently.
 European countries, in a more collective sense the European Union, were no less interested in that issue, as it was also interested in having predictable neighbors and establishing a new type of relations with the post-Soviet republics, including the Republic of Armenia.
 And the foundations of cooperation between the Republic of Armenia and the European Union were laid from an official point of view in 1991, after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
  These relations covered both the economic and political spheres, which was called the "Partnership and Cooperation Agreement" (AC), signed in 1996. It came into force on April 22, 1999. on July 1.
  This agreement created opportunities for the Republic of Armenia to establish close relations in political, economic, spiritual and other spheres.
  There were quite a lot of it. Establishment of democracy, rule of law, human rights, market economy, etc.
  By the way, the European Union also signed such agreements with Georgia and Azerbaijan.
  Naturally, the signing of such agreements with other countries of the South Caucasus pursued another goal: first, to create an opportunity for dialogue between these countries on various issues, including political issues, and second, to promote regional cooperation, which in turn could promote stability in the region. security establishment (3, p. 3).
  Therefore, it was not accidental that in the program of the National Security Strategy of the Republic of Armenia, in 345 HISTORY The development of the Republic of Armenia with the European Union is one of the priorities of the RA foreign policy, as they will have a positive impact on the strengthening of democracy and the rule of law in Armenia, the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms. .
  These relations are also important in terms of trade and economic relations with the EU, etc. (5, p. 35).
 Later, the European Union initiated the European Neighborhood Policy (ENP) program, which was joined in 2004 by the Republic of Armenia.
  This policy was also called to promote the further development of EU-Armenia relations.
  In this sense, the new initiative of the European Union is very important, which is known as the "Eastern Partnership" policy of the European Union, which included the six countries of the post-Soviet period. Belarus, Ukraine, Moldova, Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan.
 This initiative was launched by the European Union in 2009. In Prague.
  The aim of the initiative was to promote the European integration of those countries by including new partners with the European Union.
 The Eastern Partnership aimed to give the peoples of the six participating countries the opportunity to recognize European values, the basic principles and ideology of the existence and development of the European Union, etc. (4, pp. 6-7).
 Commenting on such an initiative of the European Union, Boris Navasardyan, President of the Yerevan Press Club and Coordinator of the Eastern Partnership Civil Society Forum in Armenia, said that this program (meaning the EU Eastern Partnership policy - HA, LM) is also important for understanding and recognizing Europe. from the point of view.
 It is also important to present the history, experience and values ​​of the European Union, the development of Armenia-EU relations and the current prospects, etc. (4, pp. 6-7).
 346 HISTORY The further development and deepening of the Eastern Partnership policy has led to the formation of a qualitatively new phase between the two sides, known as the Association Agreement, which the European Union signed in 2014 with Moldova, Georgia and Ukraine.
  The Republic of Armenia, being a member of the Customs Union at the same time, and since 2015, a member of the Eurasian Economic Union, did not sign the Association Agreement with the EU in Vilnius, which caused certain problems in the EU-Republic of Armenia relations.
  However, at the same Vilnius summit, a joint EU-Armenia statement was adopted stating that the parties should continue co-operation on democracy, improving the judiciary, as well as human rights, the rule of law, the fight against corruption and other issues.
 2015 Negotiations on a new EU-Armenia agreement were launched in December 1996, which was to replace the 1996 agreement. Signed the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (1, p. 35).
  Those changes led to the fact that in 2017 On November 24, 2010, Armenia and the European Union signed the "Comprehensive and Extended Partnership Agreement", which opened a new page in Armenia-EU relations.
 This historic document was signed at a time when more radical, sometimes even unexpected, changes are taking place in today's global development, forcing states to reconsider their policies and develop new conceptual approaches to the world, its political, economic and strategic problems.
  And in that great turmoil, new theories, ideas about the world, its developments, perspectives are often born and force us to regularly re-evaluate, abandon the old, age-old provisions, ideas and adopt new approaches and principles.
 At the same time, it is appropriate to note that the well-known fact is that 347 HISTORY that at different times in history have often occurred and changes that radically change the course of development of the country, its future activities, each of them faced new challenges, overcoming which becomes the right solution. is extremely important for the given state.
  Our times are one of the best evidences of that, when individual states, or groups of states - USA, European Union, Russian Federation, China, Turkey, etc., seek to increase their influence in world processes, with different countries at different speeds and different methods.
 The United States has adopted a policy that can be called the "create chaos and govern" principle and approach.
  The Russian Federation does not reconcile with the lost, the new situation and does everything in its power to play its decisive role among the superpowers.
 The European Union, in its turn, does its best to increase the role of the European Union in world processes, to spread the values ​​it believes in, to have predictable neighbors and to establish new types of relations with them and to play a decisive role in world processes.
 The People's Republic of China is more guided by the well-known Chinese proverb: the most distant way starts from the first step and increases its influence in the world processes with very calm, determined steps.
 It is not difficult to see and guess that in these big, huge processes the countries that pursue a more balanced, far-sighted policy benefit, trying not to be cut off from the past and while preserving its image and identity, as well as integrating into the values ​​that are close to your national spirit. psychology, your perceptions and can contribute to the development and progress of your country.
 Here it is appropriate to remind the figurative expression that we are in a hurry, but slowly.
 348 HISTORY Such a step, as we mentioned, was the Armenia-EU "Comprehensive and Extended Partnership Agreement", which replaced the 1996 agreement. The document signed between Armenia and the European Union.
  By the way, it was signed for a period of ten years, but was extended until 2017. November 24, which is already a new beginning and new perspectives.
 Reactions and assessments to the signing of the document vary, often contradictory, from enthusiasm to euphoria to denial, rejection and skepticism.
 By the way, it is natural, because times have changed, people have changed, who have long ago got rid of forced stereotypes, stereotyped thinking and are more free to express their thoughts, which sometimes may not be so pleasant for the authorities.
 Ultimately, the current Armenia-EU relations have come to replace the decades-old "either-or" policy that has been in place for a long time, and to pursue a more promising "and-and" policy of tolerating and trusting each other.
 Such an approach rejects the thinking left over from the Cold War.
  And this is exactly what the Republic of Armenia is pursuing, which can become, as it was mentioned, a mediator during the signing of the EU-Armenia agreement, figuratively said, a "window" between East and West.
 By the way, this new policy pursued by the Republic of Armenia is quite beneficial and profitable for the European Union, which not only increases its role in the region, but also as German Chancellor Angela Merkel noted that the signing of the agreement is also beneficial for EU security.
  And finally, such a step, initiative of the Republic of Armenia, even if at first it was not so much understood by the EU itself, often took a tough stance, then gradually the same EU changed its approaches and became more willing to accept the new proposal of the Republic of Armenia, 349 HISTORY initiative , the result of which in 2017 The signing of a new type of agreement with the Republic of Armenia at the European Union Eastern Partnership Conference on November 24, 2006 was based on the principles of self-determination of nations, territorial integrity and non-use of force.
  And now a lot, if not everything, depends on us, on the joint will of the government and the people, on a more than common position on that issue.
 But one thing is clear, that the agreement, as noted by the Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of France to Armenia Jonathan Lacotte, is unique in its form, because it is the only agreement signed with a member of the Eurasian Economic Union (EEU), whose interest and importance is that Armenia, being a full member of the EEU, can also have privileged, special relations with the European Union.
 Evaluating the agreement, it should be noted that not only Armenia is interested in it, but also the European Union, as it not only emphasizes the importance of its role in the region, which in turn, but also wants to have a neighbor or neighbor. predictable countries, including the Republic of Armenia, no matter how much it cooperates in various fields with Eurasia, CSTO member states and first of all the Russian Federation, towards which the position and policy of the European Union, to put it mildly, is still far from being friendly.
 In this sense, in such conditions, the policy of "and-and" adopted by the Republic of Armenia becomes more valuable, which can become a bridge and a unifying factor in today's restless, ever-changing world.
 And then, as important as the signing of such an agreement is, the will to carry out the transformations in accordance with the principles and questions of that agreement is much more important.
  They are quite many, diverse, why not also acceptable and unacceptable provisions, demands, which are unacceptable and inappropriate for our national image, our mentality.
  They give rise to a lot of thinking and contemplation.
  But the fact that this agreement 350 NEW HISTORY creates new opportunities for the member states of the Eurasian Economic Union is also a fact, in which case the supremacy of the Republic of Armenia increases, which seems to become a bridge for those countries.
  By the way, Daniel Hannan, Secretary General of the Alliance of Conservatives and Reformers of Europe, has a completely different opinion on this issue. He thinks that Armenia can not be a bridge between the EEU and the European Union, as Armenia is a member of the Customs Union with Russia, Belarus and other countries. are implemented collectively.
  He also adds that the agreement signed with the EU will not give anything if internal changes are not implemented in Armenia.
 Of course, the question is right, but that the Republic of Armenia has taken that step, it has realized all that very well and no one thinks that the signing of the agreement is enough to make all the questions and demands realized at once.
 The Armenian people are also well aware that there are many questions included in the more than 400 pages, the implementation of which is correctly noticed by the former chairman of the RA National Assembly Standing Committee on Human Rights, member of the "Consolidation" party Elinar Vardanyan, who depends on the society.
 It is clear where the above-mentioned thought leads.
  It is clear that we are talking about building a civil society, the implementation and control of them by the society, as the solution of such large-scale problems depends on the readiness and interest of the Armenian society to resolve the "Comprehensive and Extended Partnership Agreement between Armenia and the European Union." all the questions posed in it.
 They are very capacious and take a long time.
  The readiness of the state, the authorities and all the layers of the society to implement all that must be intertwined here.
 And if we accept that the 351 HISTORY record signed with the European Union is a reflection of the value system of our people, as in 2017. RA President Serzh Sargsyan mentioned at the EU Eastern Partnership Summit in November 2006 (6), then we should be more optimistic about it, because the issues raised in it are not alien to the mentality of our people, its essence, which has historically confirmed it and was one of the peoples of the world. which has a worthy and appreciable share in the formation of world civilization and, regardless of the catastrophes and catastrophes in which it has found itself at different times in history, has not lost its essence, its faith in the future and its undeniable contribution to it.
 All this was reaffirmed in 2018. During the change of power in the republic in April-May, during the figuratively speaking "velvet revolution", when the leader of the revolution Nikol Pashinyan was in the RA National Assembly in 2018. After the second round of voting on May 8 (the first one took place on May 1, when Nikol Pashinyan did not get the required number of votes - for 45, against 56, abstained) - now receiving the required number of votes - 59, Peaceful change of government, at the same time assuring both the National Assembly and the Armenian people that there is no need to make drastic changes in the foreign policy of the Republic of Armenia and that the Republic of Armenia is ready to follow all international obligations that Armenia has with Eurasia and CSTO. , but also emphasizing that it does not mean
 He also highlighted the relations of the Republic of Armenia with the European Union, noting that the Republic of Armenia has signed and ratified an agreement with the European Union, which needs to be implemented (7).
 The above-mentioned idea confirms that the new forces that came to power in the republic, especially in the field of foreign policy, will not make drastic changes, as it is more profitable to pursue a balanced policy with all countries.
 Responding especially to the opinion made in the Western press that he is pro-Western as a politician, Nikol Pashinyan says that he has repeatedly stated that he is neither pro-Western, nor pro-Russian, nor pro-American.
  He mentions that he is a pro-Armenian politician.
  He also rightly notes that in general sharp movements in the field of geopolitics, foreign policy are very, very unfavorable, etc. (7).
 It is not difficult to see that the Republic of Armenia is more interested in pursuing a good neighborly policy with all countries in the field of foreign policy, which further contributes to the normal development of the given state.
 Such relations also contribute to the creation of an atmosphere of mutual trust between the states.
 Therefore, it is not accidental that in 2018 On May 16, 2017, the European Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee approved the 2017 Agreement between Armenia and the European Union. The Agreement on Comprehensive and Extended Activities, signed on November 24, 2018, will be put to a vote in the European Parliament in 2018. in July (8).
 In addition to approving the agreement, the European Parliament also considered it an important issue to make progress in the Republic of Armenia in the field of freedom of the media, independence of the judiciary, corruption, money laundering and oligarchic control.
 In its relations with the Republic of Armenia, the European Union also attaches importance to the development of such values ​​as: democracy, the rule of law and human rights (8).
 Generalizing the new type of relations between the Republic of Armenia and the European Union that are developing day by day, it must be said that they are anchored on the basis of mutual trust and called for further development.
 It remains to be seen that the opportunity of that historic moment must be used to realize them, which is also a great opportunity for present and future generations to continue and develop the course of history, to make their contribution.
 .
