The purpose of this analysis is to reveal the close connection between philosophy and legal-political discourse.
  This, on the one hand, will show the forms of philosophy "intervention" to 303 PHILOSOPHY, a combined but independent field, and on the other hand, the possible expediency and usefulness of that intervention.
 In order to achieve this goal, first of all, it is necessary to determine the contents of the two central concepts-concepts (law and politics) and the necessary connection with each other.
 It is noteworthy that in this analysis, the terms "politics" and "law" are used in their broadest sense, including the entire political and legal spheres, theoretically and practically combined.
  That is, the notion of "political", in this context, contains the theory of politics (in all its branches, divisions, disciplines, etc.) and any political practice in general.
  The situation is the same in the case of the notion of "right", that is, the notion of "right" means all the theoretical and practical legal processes taken together.
 This approach does not cause logical or other cognitive deviations and allows to avoid the discussion of narrow professional issues and the complications that could arise due to the overload of these two central concepts.
 It is clear that the concept of "philosophy" is much more burdensome and uncertain than the previous two.
  Therefore, in order not to touch upon a discussion such as the issue of differentiation of philosophy, philosophy, para-philosophy, pre-philosophy, etc., the law and politics are discussed here in relation to the textbook and general understanding of "philosophy" 24.
 Thus, it is a universally accepted fact that law and politics have historically emerged within the framework of philosophy.
  However, the historical origin itself does not impose any further connection.
  Therefore, it is necessary to discuss the above-mentioned "philosophy" above law and politics and philosophy, see [pages 19, 178-179].
 304 PHILOSOPHY historical (temporal) logical connection possible by answering the following questions.
 1) Are there logical (regular) connections between philosophy and law and politics?
  If so, what are those connections?
 2) What purposeful functions can philosophy have in legal-political discourse, starting from the possible forms of connection with law and politics?
 As theoretical studies and legal-political practice show, law and politics are inextricably linked.
  Any right, as a rule, is based on some policy, and any policy is conditioned by some right (including opposition to the existing right).
  This relationship is in analogy to the Lyotarian "knowledge-power" relationship, according to which "... knowledge and power are two sides of the same issue. who decides what knowledge is and who knows what needs to be decided [12, p. 28] ».
  In the same way, some government endows the employer with some right, and the government exists according to some right.
 Davit Anhaght also indirectly referred to the inseparable unity of politics and law.
  The philosopher, trying to reconcile the controversy over the division of Plato-Aristotelian "practical philosophy", finds that Aristotle's division "... is true in three parts, because if anyone ... regulates the affairs of the city, he is engaged in politics [2, 120 page] ».
  According to Anhaght, the Platonists are also "true", who divide the "practical philosophy" into "law and justice".
  And "This is so because ethics, economics and political science serve as material for legislation and justice ... [2, pp. 122-123]."
  Thus, the logical connection between politics and law is necessary.
 The inextricable link between law and politics allows one to argue that everything relating to one of them must be related to the other, so in determining the relationship between this pair and philosophy, one can confine oneself to considering only one of them.
  However, due to this very connection between law and politics, it is practically impossible to discuss one of them comprehensively without referring to the other.
  The important thing here is that the connection between law and politics is expressed in discourse at both theoretical and practical levels, so the forms of connection between law and politics, which are related to philosophy, are unequivocally attributable to legal-political discourse.
  That is, the clarification of the relationship between law and politics and philosophy instinctively clarifies the essence of the relationship between legal-political discourse and philosophy.
 Thus, politics is a theoretical and / or practical reality within which the powers exercised over one another are distributed and redistributed, or "... is a sphere of activity within the state and between states in connection with the distribution and exercise of power. . [18, p. 797] ».
  In the framework of such a description of politics, thematic literature, can be found very often, but experience shows that the explanation of this concept is almost never neutral.
  Policy definitions, directly or indirectly, contain a tendency (intention) that plays a significant role in qualifying a given concept.
  That is, politics under the notion of gender are grouped into species that differ from each other in their intentional nature.
  The nature of politics, which is conditioned by tendency, is clearly reflected in Dolph Sternberger's "Three Roots of Politics" [17, p. 7] ”in the main concept of the work, which was rewritten in a unique way by Bernhard Sutor.
 Stern load subject politics to a typical division, as a result of which three political realities appear, and the basis of standardization is the tendency of the given policy.
 306 PHILOSOPHY The first type was founded and developed by Aristotle, who considered the basis of politics to be the self-improvement and happiness of intelligent beings.
  Starting from this understanding, the author calls the Aristotelian "root" "anthropological".
 The second type, the founder of which is N. It is Machiavelli, it is qualified as "demonological", because Machiavelli's "root", according to the author, is aimed exclusively at obtaining and maintaining power by any means.
 Finally, the August "root" is interpreted in this concept as "eschatological".
  The author considers that the theological views of Augustine the Blessed (through the efforts of V. Lenin and the enormous influence of K. Marx) became a political reality, being a secularized version of Christianity.
  The August (Marx-Leninian) political concept is considered end-to-end, because it is about preparing for the desired situation and its final achievement.
 If Aristotle thinks about equal rights and free citizens, the constitution, institutions and regulated human coexistence, then Machiavelli thinks only about the acquisition and maintenance of power by individuals.
  Finally, in the case of Marx-Leninian, there is talk of a completely different, coming "absolute world" [17 p. 7-9].
 Another division of the concept-concept of politics, on a completely different basis and procedure, is also performed by M. Weber.
  The philosopher-sociologist claims that "... all forms of self-government are political.
  They talk about the securities policy of the banks, ... the school policy, ... even the policy of a sensible woman who pretends to lead her husband [9, p. 644] ».
 It can be seen from these divisions that political tendencies can be very different, but despite the differences, politics has one stable starting point.
  The latter is expressed in Aristotle's classic description. "... as we see, any state is a kind of transmitter 307 PHILOSOPHY, and since any communication is organized for the sake of some good (because every activity means a supposed good), it is obvious that all communications strive To this or that good, at the same time, strives the communication which is the most important of all and the highest of all the other, and encloses all the other communications.
  This very communication is called state or political communication [7, p. 376] ».
 Thus, politics is a means, and the goal is good.
  And it does not matter at all what the given policy (agents) understands under the notion of "good".
  That is, regardless of the essence of "good", politics is a lever through which actions related to good are carried out.
  From here A. The fairness of Berlin's categorical assertion. "Political theory is a branch of moral philosophy that begins with the discovery or reference of a moral concept in the field of political relations [22, p. 168] ».
  Berlin mentions only "theory", but it necessarily follows that political practice, according to the same principle, should be a branch of the practice of moral philosophy.
 From all this we can conclude that politics is always preceded and accompanied by philosophical, in particular, moral views, within the framework of which politics originates, develops and is implemented.
  The content of this conclusion does not depend on the cases, what is the historical origin of politics.
  Whether politics originated naturally, by divine intervention, or caused by some system of traditions or myths, it is still surrounded by philosophy.
 The law is in a similar relationship with philosophy.
  In the "Hammurabi Rule", known to mankind as the oldest legal monument, the legislator presents the justification of his activities before listing the laws and punishments.
  The rule states: “When Man sent me to rule the people and bring aid to the country, 308 PHILOSOPHY I established law and justice in the country and contributed to the welfare of the people [25, p. 9] ».
  In other words, this legal-political activity is not an end in itself. It is a means of administering justice and promoting the welfare of nations.
 There are such justifications in the preambles of almost all states' constitutions and other legal documents as well.
  The Universal Declaration of Human Rights states: "For the recognition of the dignity and equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world....
 The US Constitution states: "We ... determined and established this Constitution for the United States of America ... to establish a more perfect Unity, to establish Justice, to ensure inner Peace, ... and to preserve the Blessing of Freedom."
  The Constitution of the Russian Federation also pursues "good and justice" [11], and the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia refers to all universal values ​​[3].
  Finally, the great Armenian legislator Mkhitar Gosh in the preface of his "Judgment Book" claims, "... that [the legislation] is of great benefit to us, because these writings are for everyone, along with their power, putting people in proportion."
  Because their intention is to reduce their sins and thus put an end to evil.
  And the consequence is nothing but that which makes us agree and agree, from which love is established, which is the head of all the commandments [1, pages 18-19].
 All the mentioned legal-political documents point to a number of philosophical categories as a goal. "Justice", "freedom", "kindness", "universal values", etc.
  However, the connection between philosophy and legal-politics does not end there, it continues and has its direct expressions in the most private and intensive cases of legal-political processes as well.
 309 PHILOSOPHY There are numerous meta-legal and meta-political approaches, provisions and concepts in a number of legal and political documents, which show that philosophy constantly accompanies political and legal processes, being one of the most central layers of their development.
  Thus, for example, in the RA Criminal Code, among many others, there is such a provision. Article 10. Principle of individualization of justice and responsibility 1. The punishment applied to a person who has committed a crime and other means of criminal action must be fair, commensurate with the gravity of the crime, the circumstances of the crime, the person of the perpetrator, necessary and sufficient to correct him and prevent new crimes. 4] ».
 This article's implicitly contains a number of philosophical issues. First, the issue of compliance is raised, equating the latter with "fairness".
  This is problematic, for the simple reason that the correspondence of thought to reality (reality) is not the classic description of "just" but of "truth". "... he who speaks accordingly about things as they are, speaks the truth [14, p. 426] ", and" ... to say that existence exists and non-existence does not exist means to tell the truth [6, p. 141] ».
  It is a completely different matter that the truth can be converted into justice in principle, and vice versa. justice is truth [see 16, p. 233], but this conversion implies a profound philosophical discretion and a complex construction.
  Second, the article mentions the purpose of the punishment as a criterion. to the criminal "... to correct and prevent new crimes."
 The existence of punishment, its purposes, its effectiveness, etc., all these are also problematic points of view, which the philosophy of law deals with, necessarily connected with ethics.
 310 PHILOSOPHY Thus, political and legal texts affirm that philosophy, directly or in the contextual context, is eternally present in both politics and law, containing and being contained in them.
  Philosophy, then, is not only historically but also temporarily connected with law and politics.
  Both historically and logically, philosophy precedes, accompanies and follows law and politics.
  Therefore, it can be said that politics originates in ethics-philosophy and, due to its fixation, becomes a statue in law.
 The above examples speak only of the positive effect of philosophy on law and politics, but philosophy also has a "negative" effect on these two activities, both revising and dismantling.
  As shown above, political and legal texts incorporate philosophical justifications, clarifications, and in general, structures that require discussion, temporarily and locally solving an eternal problem (in a private or unique way).
  This theoretical protocol hinders the further process of construction of law and policy, starting from the absence of need.
  These are then seen as complete and solid systems and begin to function as obvious "self-evident truths."
  At this historical moment, legal and political "self-evident truths" are unilaterally isolating themselves from philosophy.
 But the philosophy continues to keep these legal (political) points of view in the center of discretion.
  Such "self-evident" formulas in the relevant "code" and in the public consciousness are subject to philosophy review and reinterpretation, that is, reinterpretation.
  This process of reinterpretation continues because there is no one-time problem for philosophy. Any solution is either always subject to cancellation or is simply not acceptable, with 311 PHILOSOPHY there is another, completely opposite point of view.
  And because, from a philosophical point of view, each problem allows for different, incompatible and mutually exclusive solutions [see 13, p. 8], so the opposite view of each possible solution continues to be discussed, criticized and reinterpreted.
 This same analytical process can not only continue in terms of previously possible conflicting solutions, but after the solution is proposed, others may also appear.
 And if within the framework of law and politics an issue is considered solved or another stage is entered, then the philosophy continues to keep in the center of attention the resolutions, by the fixation of which a problem was considered solved.
  For example, the French jurist-philosopher Alain de Benoit sharply criticizes a number of provisions in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which still continue to play a major role in global legal and political processes.
  Benoit, among others, discusses a case of lack of legal-conceptual accuracy and makes a rhetorical question. "Dignity, whatever its meaning, becomes problematic when it is assumed to be an absolute quality.
  It is clear what it means to be "worthy of this or that" if it is about this or that, but what does it mean to be "worthy" in itself [8, p. 53] ».
 Thus, philosophy, in fact, continues to discuss, critique, analyze, and carry out other processes in relation to everything that has already received its solid and self-contained expression within the framework of law or policy and has been put into operation.
 This process of reconsideration, being a typical philosophical one, does not necessarily oblige the person who carries it out to be a philosopher.
  The process can be carried out by any subject, which will examine-critique the given mental record from the outside.
  And this process, in case of law, will be qualified as meta-legal, and in case of politics, as meta-political examination-criticism.
  The objectively necessary 312 PHILOSOPHY is conditioned by the essence of being a human philosopher and a necessarily human being of philosophy.
  And the "conscious elaboration of philosophy" is a never-ending and constantly renewed commitment, which is currently being implemented as a whole.
  ... The contemplation of this commitment ... will not fade as long as people remain human [21, p. 16] ».
  Philosophy "... is always present where man lives [21, p. 134] "because" All people are philosophers.
  Even if they do not understand the problems of their own philosophy, they still have philosophical, at least, prejudices [15, p. 129] ».
 Thus, before and during the construction of law and politics, philosophy largely cooperates positively with these twin activities.
  However, immediately after the establishment of law and politics, philosophy begins to operate against the established structures.
  As a result of philosophical reinterpretation, the notions of law and politics either become more complicated and more viable, or are rejected and pushed out.
  These possible developments take place through the opposition of the established views, again with the cooperation of philosophy. just as the construction of the previous statue took place.
 This process, by the principle of analogy, can be attributed to all forms of spiritual culture. Carl Jaspers describes this same process in the context of religion and anti-religion in their attitude towards philosophy. “Enlightened by the revelation of God, the gravitational force of the afterlife, or the aspiration of the all-powerful omnipotent power of both the ungodly world, both would like philosophy to cease to exist [21, p. 16] ».
 There is also a description of another similar process in T. Has the concept of scientific revolutions.
  According to Koon, in the course of normal science, the paradigm accepted by the scientific community operates.
  However, these 313 PHILOSOPHY gradually anomalies appear, contradictions and internal problems accumulate.
  This is followed by the scientific revolution with a new paradigm [see, for example, p. 24, p. 154].
 Within the framework of this analysis, it is not possible to determine to what extent and with what cultural form the "pattern" described above can be attributed, but it can be argued that in the case of the two interests we are interested in, law and politics, this pattern works fully.
  And this stems from the fact that law and politics, in Nietzsche's style, are very human, as opposed to, say, natural or mathematical problems.
  Putting the latter forward and solving does not imply a direct connection with human nature.
  Such problems are also related to a person, but indirectly.
  For example, it is well known that Copernicus' model of the sun-centered universe became the subject of public and governmental-political debate, not because it directly influenced public consciousness or human worldview, but because its implications were worldviews directly related to human nature.
 It is noteworthy that both law and politics, as well as all humanitarian forms of spiritual culture (art, fiction, etc.) are directly related to human nature.
  However, these forms may have little or no relation to the general public.
  In contrast, law and politics are always directly related to any individual, regardless of their will, worldview, desires, etc., because all people are the "beneficiaries" of law and politics.
 And this is also the reason why Aristotle conditioned human nature with politics. "... man is by nature a political being, and he who, in harmony with his nature, and not by chance, lives outside the state, is either a morally immature being, or a superman ... [7, p. 378] ».
 Finally, since all the operating realities of law and politics (theoretical and practical) are directly and directly related to man, their understanding and application is always based on some concept (s) of human nature and essence.
  And law and politics cannot function without taking into account the eternal Kantian question, to which the whole philosophy can be led. "What is a person [10, p. 332] ».
  And the ideas about a person are very different, even at the most general level. "If we ask a developed European what he thinks about the concept of 'man', then, almost always, circles of three incompatible ideas will start colliding in his consciousness.
  ... the idea of ​​a Judeo-Christian ... circle ...
  ... the idea of ​​an ancient Greek circle ...
  ... understanding the framework of modern natural and genetic psychology [20, p. 30] ».
  It follows that political and legal life will not be purposeful unless there is at least a conventional consensus on what and how to be human, because, for example, "the freedom of an Oxford lecturer is very different from the freedom of an Egyptian farmer." , p. 171] ».
  So either the direct text clarifies, defines, interprets and understands what a person (and not only a person) is, what kind of what and for what, or the actions are based on the "philosophical prejudices" of the agents.
  And such questions (what is it, what is it like and what is it for?) Are typical philosophical [2, p. 35].
 Given the philosophical nature of these questions, it should be noted that in addition to the above arguments, law and politics necessarily presuppose philosophy as a context, because philosophy guides any normative determination of law and policy (why and / or why it should be as they are / are not).
 Thus, the logical connection between law and politics and philosophy is legal and necessary. Law and politics are not only always accompanied by philosophy, but being completely independent spheres, they are unnoticed 315 PHILOSOPHY are within philosophy.
  Philosophy is simply inherent in law and politics.
 Philosophy is a totalitarian attitude towards law and politics.
  And this given is so direct that its kindness may not even be noticed by the naked eye.
  It can be demonstrated mostly through logical analysis, as such an attempt was made with this analysis.
 The close connection of philosophy with law and politics allows a clearly conscious and purposeful intervention of philosophy into legal-political discourse, as opposed to again necessary but elemental intervention.
 It is a textbook truth that philosophy has ontological, epistemological, value and other spheres and sub-systems.
  These, individually or together, can be a purposeful basis for defining the concepts and formulas of legal-political discourse.
  As we have seen above, both law and politics, in their separate and combined discourses, face the problem of clarification of concepts, that is, in legal-political discourse there is almost always the issue of legal-conceptual accuracy.
  And one of the functions of a philosopher is "... not to supply knowledge, but to understand [21, p. XI] ».
  Therefore, philosophy can and should be consciously used to coordinate, criticize, clarify and understand legal-political discourse concepts.
 .
