Funded by the Cairo branch of the Armenian General Benevolent Union in 2010. "Areg" periodical is published till today, which continues to fulfill the mission of the Arabic supplement of "Arev" daily.
  "Areg" periodical, like "Arev" Arabic supplement, tried to keep the coverage of the activities of Egyptian-Armenian public and political figures in the center of attention and to keep their memory alive among the Arabic-speaking readers.
 The Armenian community of Egypt has always played an important role in the social and political life of Egypt.
  Armenians stood out in the field of culture and education and an important link 356 HISTORY was the progressive ideas of Europe, the European educational system, the introduction and teaching of languages ​​in Egypt.
  The Arabic periodical notes that the representatives of the Egyptian-Armenian community, first of all, are fluent in Armenian and Turkish.
  Many Armenians also knew Arabic and wrote in that language.
  The translation work in Egypt at the end of the 18th century and during the 19th century was organized mainly by Armenians, who made various translations from English, French and Italian into Turkish, Arabic and Armenian.
  Areg, one of the Egyptian-Armenian translators, presents the activities of Poghos Bey Yusufyan, who worked as a translator at the British Consulate in Izmir at the end of the 18th century. He returned to Alexandria and served for about 30 years in the Egyptian government during the reign of Muhammad Ali [1, No. 42, pp. 6-10].
 During the rule of Muhammad Ali, the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs was formed, which was initially called the Office of Trade and State Affairs.
  In the 19th century, this position was mainly occupied by the representatives of the Armenian community of Egypt: Poghos Bey Yusufyan (1837-1844), Artin Chrakyan (1844-1850), Stepan Demirchyan (1853-1857), Nubar Nubaryan (1866-1874, 1878-1879). 1884-1888), Tigran Abroyan - Deputy Foreign Minister (1882-1891) [2, No 5, p. 18].
  Nevertheless, the biggest investment of Armenians in the Egyptian economy is the sphere of trade, which flourished in that period.
  The Arabic supplement of the "Sun" daily mentions that many Armenians were called "trade agents" in Egypt, so it is not accidental that during the time of Muhammad Ali's minister of trade, the Armenians were held by Poghos Bey Yusufyan (1826-1833), Artin Chrakyan (1833-1850).
  The magazine attaches great importance to the role of Poghos Bey Yusufyan in the Egyptian state system, presenting the latter as M. Member of Ali's inner circle [1, No 42, p. 7].
  Poghos Bey Yusufyan was the chief translator of Muhammad Ali, the first class advisor.
  357 HISTORY The Armenian figure greatly contributed to the maintenance of order in Egypt and the revitalization of the economy.
 Poghos Bey Yusufyan was convinced that the key to Egypt's wealth was trade with the outside world, so the country's customs and agricultural production were included in the state balance, and domestic and foreign trade networks were organized [4, p. 73].
  Well-known merchants with close ties to Western trading companies were invited to Egypt from Istanbul and Smyrna to boost trade.
 1824 Poghos Bey Yusufyan invited 40 Armenian families from Bengal, India, who specialize in growing bile and refining the dye, to Egypt to develop bile cultivation [4, p. 75].
  The Armenian diplomat had a serious role in the creation of the War Divan, on his advice the ranks of the army were replenished with locals.
  Due to the foreign policy pursued by Poghos Bey Yusufyan in 1841. By the decree of the Ottoman sultan, the family of Muhammad Ali was granted the right of inheritance to rule Egypt.
  As a result of Poghos Bey Yusufyan's multifaceted activity, the educational system in Egypt was improved. The Supreme Council of Public Education was established, preschools and vocational schools were opened [1, No 42, pages 8-9].
  The Egyptian-Armenian politician has also rendered great services to the Egyptian-Armenian community.
  In particular, through him, the Prelacy was entrusted with the administration of matters relating to death and inheritance [4, p. 80].
 The famous Egyptian-Armenian figure Nubar Nubaryan mentions in his memoirs that Poghos Bey Yusufyan was one of the most loyal people of Muhammad Ali, whom he first met in the 1810s in Alexandria at the funeral of his father, who was Muhammad Ali's representative in Paris.
  Poghos Bey Yusufyan was such an important person for Muhammad Ali that when he learned that in 1844 Poghos Bey Yusufyan was buried without a military rite.
 In addition to their economic success, Armenians have also made significant contributions to improving Egypt's education system.
  1826 The Egyptian group sent to study in Europe also included 4 Armenians: Artin and Khosrov Chrakyan, Stepan Demirchyan and Hovsep Bashyan.
 After graduating, Stepan Demirchyan headed the Egyptian Military School in Paris, and Artin Chrakyan, along with Yusuf Hekekyan, played an important role in establishing the Egyptian School of Engineering.
 Egyptian-Armenians have held numerous leading positions in various educational commissions and educational programs in Egypt [2, No 123, pages 4-5].
  Speaking about the development of the Egyptian education system, "Areg" periodically highly values ​​the role of Artin Chrakyan (Yakub Artin) in the development of education in the last quarter of the 19th century.
  Artin Chrakyan, holding the position of the Minister of Education of Egypt in 18851906, greatly contributed to the improvement of the educational system in Egypt.
  Artin Chrakyan, mastering different foreign languages ​​and studying the educational systems of foreign countries, at the end of the 19th century authored several works on the improvement of the educational system.
 Yakub Artin Pasha, who was awarded the title of "Al-Ustaz al-Qabir" (great master) for his reforms in the Egyptian education system, has a special place among the prominent Egyptian-Armenian statesmen with his selfless service.
  Yakub Artin Pasha was born in 1842.
  After receiving primary education in Egypt, he continues his education. In Constantinople, he then left for Paris, where he specialized in the field of law.
  During his studies in Europe, Jakub Artin studied different languages: English, French, Italian, Turkish and Ancient Greek.
  1870 359 HISTORY: The Armenian politician has held various positions since then. In particular, he has held various positions in the field of education and finance.
  1880 In 1882 he was appointed a member of the Statistics Commission, then a member of the Civil Service Commission, a member of the Alexandria Customs Special Studies Commission. Yakub Artin was appointed a member of the Commission for the Preservation of Arab Monuments [1, No 54, p. 22].
  In addition, Yakub Arti held various positions in the General Commission of the Egyptian Railway Station, headed the Egyptian delegation to the 8th Congress of Orientalists in Vienna, and was a member of the National Delegation led by Poghos Nubar Pasha of various universities [3, p. 117].
  Yakub Artin in 1913 He was appointed Director of Cairo Water Management, and in 1916 - Plenipotentiary of the Government of Egypt to the International Suez Canal Water Companies [1, No. 54, p. 23].
 During the reign of Muhammad Ali's successors, Abbas and Sayyid Pasha, many public education institutions in Egypt were closed and education was neglected.
  During the reign of Khdiv Ismail, only steps were taken to make radical changes in the education system.
  Yakub Artin Pasha made an invaluable contribution to the realization of that goal.
  Jacob Artin reached the highest level of his activity in 1886, when he was appointed vicar (minister) of Egyptian milk [2, No 54, pp. 22-23].
  During the 20 years he held that position, Yakub Artin implemented a number of reforms in the field of education.
  In particular, primary, secondary and higher education systems were established in Egypt, and vocational training schools were established.
  The Armenian statesman established the Cairo State Teacher Training College to provide teachers for new educational institutions in cities and villages [4, p. 112].
  During the reign of Hagop Artin, special attention was paid to the teaching of foreign languages ​​in schools.
  The Arabic periodical notes that 360 HISTORY that through the efforts of Yakub Artin schools for girls were established, as well as a great deal of work was done to improve the socio-economic conditions of teachers [1, No 54, pp. 24-25].
  In addition to holding public office, Yakub Artin has been a prominent researcher and author of numerous works on the Egyptian economy in French.
  In addition to his professional studies, Jacob Artin compiled and published in France a collection of national sayings, "National Sayings of the Nile Valley."
  The sayings of Yakub Artin expressing the way of life and the way of thinking of the Egyptian people are still relevant in the Egyptian society.
  The Armenian socio-political figure in the "Scientific Journal" magazine in 1883-1909. He has written numerous articles in French about the cultural life and history of the Egyptian-Armenian community, Poghos Nubar Pasha, Poghos Yusufyan and his father Artin Chrakyan [1, No 63, pages 15-18].
  Hagop Artin was also one of the first to put forward the idea of ​​establishing a university in Egypt [2, No 123, p. 22].
  During his patriotic activity he was awarded many titles and awards by the rulers of Egypt [1, No. 54, pp. 20-25].
 Hagop Artin rendered invaluable service to the Armenian Catholic Church.
  Thanks to the intercession of the relevant bodies in 1905. On November 18, 1945, the Armenian Catholic community in Egypt was granted the right to have its own internal code [4, p. 114].
  The Armenian figure played an important role in activating the educational and cultural life of the Egyptian-Armenians, standing by the community in meeting the needs of the growing Armenian community.
  1897 Through the efforts of Hagop Artin, the School of Immaculate Conception was opened in 1894-1896. to shelter and educate Armenian orphans who migrated to Egypt as a result of the Hamidian massacres.
  In addition, through his efforts, the Yeghiayan Student Foundation was established to cover the higher education costs of orphaned and poor Armenian students in Egypt or Europe, provided that after graduation, 361 HISTORY would work in the country's national institutions [4, p. 115].
  Hagop Artin also took an active part in the establishment of a tent city for Armenian migrants in Port Said.
  Following the example of Hagop Artin and his ilk, the Egyptian-Armenians not only welcomed all Armenian immigrants, but also provided comprehensive assistance and promoted the rapid integration of Armenian immigrants into Egyptian society.
 .
