At all stages of reading instruction, focusing students' attention on a new vocabulary, further use of imported words, and work on it is very important [3, p. 24].
  However, it is more important for learners to develop the ability to discover the meaning of word units.
 The discovery of a new word meaning is carried out in two main ways. 1. non-linguistic, 258 PEDAGOGY 2. linguistic.
 The non-linguistic method includes subject examination means. a) films depicting objects, pictures, actions and events, b) gestures, c) costumes.
 These methods actually improve the memory of the word, they better impress the image or action of the subject in the students' consciousness.
  [1, pp. 120-138] The example shows the meaning of the word "bridge" through pictures.
  (Example images from www.google.com) Figure 1 However, the non-linguistic way of identifying a word has limited possibilities, as the meanings of many words cannot be expressed visually.
  In addition, the use of images often complicates the generalization process.
  The other drawback of the principle of objectivity lies in the above-mentioned: both the picture and the subject are ambiguous.
 Linguistic ways of discovering a lexicon include translated and non-translated forms.
 The non-translational method of lexical identification includes such means as: a) definition (discovering the meaning of a word through familiar words). b) enumeration. 259 PEDAGOGY c) Discovering the meaning of a word with the help of synonyms / antonyms. d) Guessing the meaning of words based on international words Many international words are similar.
 To develop the ability to guess the meaning of words based on international words, we offer the following types of tasks:  Write the Armenian equivalents of the following international words: method e) guessing the meaning of the word based on the analysis of word-formation models (components) In order for the student to be able to recognize the word belonging to the word, in order to develop the appropriate skill, the following tasks can be suggested: Գտնել Find the words that indicate an attribute in the following words: Դարձ Make the following words adjectives, using the latter correctly in the sentences. 260 EXERCISE գտնել Find the verbs in column B that correspond to the nouns in column A. Առանձն Highlight in the given vocabulary. - nouns, - adjectives, - verbs.
 Գտնել Find words with the same root among the given words. Առանձն Separate simple nouns (NT), person nouns (NP), adjectives (Adj) and verbs (V) from the following vocabulary.  Specify the word that corresponds to the given sentence. c. weakly TEACHING եցնել Match the words with their definitions. Տեղադր Put the following words in the sentences based on their meaning. [2, c. 215] The translation method of revealing the lexicon is expressed in two ways. a) by direct translation of the word, b) translation / explanation.
 Thus, in not all cases it is necessary to turn to the help of a bilingual dictionary.
  Frequent use of a bilingual dictionary in the reading process also hinders the comprehension of the content of the text.
  However, it also requires the development of appropriate capacities.
 In order to develop the ability to use a bilingual dictionary, S. K. Folomkina [2, p. 132-134] distinguishes the following types of exercises: 1. Arrange the words in alphabetical order.
 As a linguistic material can serve a) words starting with different letters, b) words starting with the same letters (song, sun, slang), c) words starting with the same letter combinations (still, 262 TEACHING Exercises are performed in a limited time.
 2. Find the initial / dictionary forms of the following words: 3. Determine what idioms the following words belong to and translate them: 4. Find the given polysemous word from the dictionary by choosing the meaning of the word corresponding to the given sentence.
 The work on unfamiliar words can be represented by the diagram below, which is a slightly modified version of the diagram proposed by Viberlauer [4, p. 96].
 Reading a text containing unfamiliar words. Based on the Discovery of the Word with English Explanation The Discovery of the Word with Synonyms, Antonyms Bilingual Dictionary. Direct word translation, translation-explanation Figure 1. Stages of work on unfamiliar words 263 TEACHING However, work on new words is very important because it helps students not only to expand their vocabulary,
 .
