In the professional literature, in legal practice, one can often find the use of the term "corruption", which, unlike other official crimes, is distinguished by its higher public danger.
  It significantly discredits the state authorities, degrades the capacity and content of their activities.
  The prevalence of this phenomenon in the society causes skepticism that various issues cannot be solved without bribes through legal means.
 The Republic of Armenia, being a member of the Council of Europe, has undertaken international obligations to adopt adequate legislation to effectively combat both active and passive corruption, imposing appropriate criminal penalties for them.
  Its purpose is to prevent discrimination as a result of disproportionate action or inaction of an official in the protection of human rights, freedoms and legitimate interests.
  This is more than just the abuse of official position, because the consequence of it leads to the distortion of the basic principles of the rule of law: not only is the official not guided by the rule of law, but he also creates a discriminatory situation in the protection of individuals' rights.
 Proceeding from the importance of the issue, from the imperatives of the establishment of the rule of law, it is necessary to ensure the organization of an effective fight against corruption, which will contribute to the strengthening of democracy, rule of law, protection of human rights and freedoms.
 Despite the urgency and urgency of the issue, a number of issues remain controversial, leading to both theoretical debates and complications in legal practice.
  In particular, there is no common concept of "corruption" in the legal literature, which characterizes the manifestations of corruption with the highest public danger.
 As a general and collective concept, corruption includes all possible crimes related to bribery, criminal activity - bribery, bribery, bribery, even bribery provocation1.
 Professor SV Maximov, a prominent expert in the field, defines bribery as the use of their status by state, municipal or other public servants (including judges, deputies) or employees of other commercial organizations (including international ones). , for the illegal acquisition of services or privileges or the provision of such property, rights, services or privileges (including property) by such a person2.
 Chucha gave a narrower definition of the concept of corruption in the comments of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation: "the essence of which is that an official receives illegal material remuneration from other persons for his official powers or official position" 3.
 We consider that the inclusion of bribery only in the concept of bribery is not justified, does not follow from its essence and does not express the high public danger of that phenomenon.
 According to another view, bribery is a mercenary crime, the essence of which is that an official receives illegal remuneration from other persons or organizations due to his / her official behavior or position4.
 Trainin mentions that bribery means receiving a bribe.
  At the same time, bribery և bribery was considered by the latter as a special form of bribery.
 In this regard, he expressed a different position to NP Kucheriav.
  He considers that in bribery, receiving a bribe, giving a bribe, and mediating a bribe are committing the same crime in a special way6.
 ND Durmanov views bribery as a joint crime, which combines receiving and giving bribes.
  He writes: "It would be more correct to view bribery և bribery not as two independent crimes, but as one complex crime."
 In addition to the above main approaches to the definition of bribery, some authors's scientific work has included more flexible, differentiated approaches.
  Thus, B.V. Zdravomislov thinks that for corruption it is necessary to distinguish two features: corruption in a broad sense and corruption in a narrow sense.
  Bribery in the narrow sense means receiving a bribe, and in the broad sense, all three crimes - receiving a bribe, giving a bribe - bribery mediation8.
 As O. Kachmazov notes, "although there is a close connection between giving and receiving bribes", nevertheless, they are independent crimes, as they have a special relation to each other only by the signs in them.
  In particular, only the difference of the subject of the crime is such an essential circumstance, which does not allow to consider them as one crime ”9.
  It is noteworthy that receiving a bribe և giving a bribe has different objective aspects, characteristics of the subject - interests, motives for actions և goals.
  Agreeing with the approach that receiving and giving bribes, bribery mediation are different crimes or are conditioned by each other, let us mention that it also has a legal basis.
  Both in the criminal code of the Republic of Armenia and in the criminal codes of foreign countries, various articles are directly separated in international legal acts for receiving, giving, and in some cases for mediation, bribery.
 We find that the crimes that constitute bribery are interrelated with each other, forming a "necessary complicity", because if there is no fact of giving a bribe, there is no such thing as receiving a bribe or bribery.
  We agree with A. Yakovl's point of view that the crime of receiving a bribe cannot be considered over if it was not given.
  In the same way, the crime of giving a bribe cannot be considered over if the subject of the bribe has not been received.
  That is, each of the mentioned crimes cannot be committed independently, without connection with the other 10.
 This is how G. Bakhtadze interprets the notion of bribery, noting that receiving and giving bribes are considered a complex crime.
  It always implies the performance of two logically related actions: receiving a bribe and giving a bribe.
  The first is done by the giver and the second by the receiver.
  Giving always logically precedes receiving, if there is no giver, then there can be no recipient, and vice versa11.
 Agreeing with the presented point of view, we find that taking a bribe and giving a bribe are two closely interconnected criminal acts that cannot be completed on their own.
  It turns out that the bribe-giver "supports" the bribe-taker so that the latter completes his publicly dangerous act.
 Thus, summarizing the above, we consider it necessary to emphasize that corruption includes three independent crimes against the normal functioning of the state apparatus, which are interconnected and form part of a single chain, that is, taking bribes, giving bribes, and bribery.
 The notion of "bribery", which is the subject of corruption, gives rise to legal disputes.
  A bribe is, in a broad sense, any material benefit, including property rights and obligations, for example, the recipient of a bribe is exempt from paying the debt and repaying the material assets taken in advance.
 Many scholars believe that the subject of bribery is bribery12.
  In particular, O.K. Kachmazov considers it correct to define the object of the crime as any object of the material world, due to certain properties of which the criminal law connects it with a specific crime.
  Based on this, he claims that the subject of the bribe can be related to the subject of the crime, as in this case the object of public relations is violated by bribing the official13.
  However, by interpreting the subject of the crime in this way, it becomes impossible to separate it from the means of committing the crime.
 Contrary to this approach, some authors note that it complicates the detection of the elements of the crime and requires a substantial review of the criminal doctrine.
  That is why it is suggested to stick to the old traditional point of view, especially when in judicial practice bribery is called the subject of a crime14.
 Regarding the issue under discussion, we consider the view that bribery is not a subject of a crime, but a means of committing it, as the subject is the material reflection of the object, and the bribe has nothing to do with the object15.
 We consider that the subject of bribery is, in fact, a means of crime, with the help of which a publicly dangerous act is committed, in particular, it influences the official to perform the actions that constitute the purpose of bribery or to refrain from doing them.
  Its presence is considered a mandatory feature of the objective side of "giving" and receiving bribes.
 It should be noted that in the RA Criminal Code of 1961 the legislator did not reveal the essence of the subject of the bribe in any way.
  In contrast, the current RA Criminal Code clarified the concept of the subject of bribery, defining it as money, property, property rights, securities or any other advantage.
 By dram it is necessary to understand both the Armenian dram, which according to the RA Law on the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia is issued; .
  As for money withdrawn from circulation, it is not considered a subject for receiving or giving bribes in that sense; it should be assessed as other assets.
 The essence of securities is revealed in Article 146 of the RA Civil Code, according to which the security is a document certifying the property rights, subject to the observance of the obligatory conditions, the implementation or transfer of which is possible only when submitting it.
  Article 153 of the RA Civil Code lists the types of securities by which securities are classified: bond, check, ordinary bill, transferable bill (payment), stock, bill of lading, bank certificate (bank book, bank certificate), double reserve certificate reserve certificate, investment fund share և other documents, which are classified as securities by securities laws.
 Other benefits include benefits of any kind, whether property or non-property, such as free repair of an apartment or car, construction of a house, etc. sponsorship և etc.16.
 He also referred to the issue of the plenum of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, noting that property benefits should mean, in particular, the reduction of rent, the reduction of the price of goods sold, the reduction of interest rates on bank loans.
  The above property benefits must be given a specific monetary value in the ongoing negotiations between the bribe-giver and the bribe-giver17.
  A clear definition of the latter is important for the qualification of the act.
 In addition, the UN Convention against Corruption, adopted on 9 December 2003, defines the term "property", according to Article 2 of which "property" means any property, whether tangible or intangible, movable or immovable, expressed in the form of objects or rights, as legal documents or acts affirming the right of ownership or interest in such values.
 It follows from the above that even giving a positive description, criticism, opinion to an official in return for his actions is considered a subject of bribery, as according to the current criminal legislation, it includes in the concept of providing other benefits.
  In this regard, it is unequivocal that the provision of non-property benefits is endowed with no less public danger.
 We consider it necessary to emphasize that the analysis of the RA Criminal Code shows that there is no common concept of "bribery", as such a circumstance causes obstacles to the application of criminal law.
  The legislator, not observing the requirements of the RA Law on Legal Acts, gave various interpretations to the concepts of "receiving a bribe" and "giving a bribe".
 The mentioned conclusion is substantiated by the following reasoning. 1. 311 of the RA Criminal Code, as well as Article 200, receiving a bribe in person or through an intermediary for himself or another person is to receive or demand money, property, property rights, securities or any other advantage or to accept the promise or offer to receive - for the benefit of the bribe-giver or the person representing him / her by an official within the scope of his / her authority to perform or not to perform any action or to facilitate the performance or non-performance of such action by using his / her official position or for sponsorship or permission.
 2. Part 1 of Article 1542 of the RA Criminal Code envisages criminal liability for receiving bribes from candidates in person or through a mediator on the condition of voting for or against one of the candidates, participating in the elections or refusing to participate in the elections.
  In other words, in the sense of the article under discussion, receiving a bribe is limited only to passing the subject of the bribe to the recipient of the bribe, as the disposition of the article clearly states the actions for which the bribe is given.
  That is, the concept of receiving a bribe does not include the purpose of its fulfillment.
 3. According to Article 201 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Armenia, “(կ) receiving bribes, ie those persons (eg athletes, referees, coaches, team leaders or other participants and organizers of professional competitions, as well as organizers of formal commercial competitions and awards receiving or claiming money, property, property rights, securities or any other advantage for themselves or another person, personally or through a mediator, or accepting a promise or offer to receive it.
  It follows from the literal interpretation of this provision that the concept of bribery does not include the purpose of its bribery, for example, influencing the results of competitions or tenders.
  We consider that in the mentioned case the non-fixing of the goal is simply omitted, as the legislator has directly provided it in part 1 of the mentioned article, when defining criminal liability for giving bribes to the mentioned persons.
 From the study of the above, it becomes obvious that the legislator has defined concepts with different content with the same term, that is, receiving bribes.
  Moreover, he did not define the concept of receiving a bribe as having the relevant content, that is, receiving illegal remuneration from a public servant who is not an official.
 The above differentiated approaches by the legislature in legal practice give rise to legal disputes and controversies that may lead to the avoidance of criminal liability by the perpetrators (for example, when bribery or bribery is found to be bribery. when resolving the issue of prosecuting an employee).
 Taking into account the above, we propose to define the notion of "bribery" in the general part of the RA Criminal Code, which will solve the issue of criminalizing the persons who have given or received it, by the relevant articles of the special part of the RA Criminal Code.
  In particular, we propose to rewrite the provision in the general part of the RA Criminal Code as follows: "Money, property, property rights, securities or any other advantage intended for the bribe-giver or any other person to take any action in favor of the bribe-giver or other person." or to refrain from doing so. ”
  The provision of this provision will free the RA Criminal Code from repeating the definition of the same concept in each case, as it will ensure its joint perception and application.
 In the event that an official, using his official position, facilitates the performance or refraining from actions of another official, his actions will be qualified as assistance or mediation of bribery, depending on the factual circumstances of the case.
  As for the other actions that constitute the purpose of receiving or giving a bribe - permitting or sponsorship - they by their nature imply either performing certain actions (for example, promotion) or refraining from performing certain actions (for example, not being subject to a disciplinary penalty), therefore included are in the concept of bribery.
  Therefore, we consider that it is not expedient to further emphasize permission and patronage as a type of action (inaction) performed by a person in the case when the same criminal responsibility is provided for them.
 .
