We can get some information about Marab Mtsurnatsi by the semantic and psychological analysis of the Khorenatsi and Sebios passages that have come down to his name.
 First of all, it is striking that he considers his ethnological problems in the field of general human genealogy, but S. Regardless of the book.
 Movses Khorenatsi 1, noticing Marab Mtsurnatsi and S. The difference between the lists of the Jabetian heirs of the book, immediately intervenes. "Now in the same book (Mtsurnatsi - AS) I started saying: Yapostoste 2, Merod (c?), Sirat, Taklad, which is Jabet, Gomer, Tiras, Torgom.
  After which the same chronologist (Marab Mtsurnatsi - AS) said before. Hayk, Aramaneak and the others are in order ... ”(I, T).
  And this is not the only case.
  Because, according to Khorenatsi, the source of Marab Mtsurnatsi, the book translated from Chaldean into Greek by the order of Alexander, also the names of Noah's sons S. He knows differently from the book. Zruan Movses Khorenatsi's "Armenian History" will be referred to by the beginning of the book, which will be referred to by the numbers of the book and the chapter mentioned in brackets in the middle of the line, in Roman and Armenian numerals.
  For example: (I, T) [1].
 The word "te" attached to the word "Yapetos" is a Greek conjunction that Mtsurnatsi did not understand and considered as the end of the word, which passed to Khorenatsi.
 76 and Titan and Japheth ... ”(I, T).
  But there is also a third difference. With the book.
  Mtsurnatsi knows Bel from a non-Christian source that he is a descendant of Titan.
 The one who reconciles these three differences, however, is Khorenatsi and not Mtsurnatsi, which means that the latter does not have the Bible in his hand.
 Let's compare this with another observation.
 According to Khorenatsi, the original book of Mtsurnatsi, the history of the Armenian ancestors, begins like this. "Terrible and visible, the first in the world and the great cause of the world, the beginning of the world and of mankind.
  And they found a nation cut off from society from the sky, unsteady, victorious in body and huge ... ”(I, T).
  Here it becomes clear that the author is not only a Christian, but also a regular pagan, because he represents all the gods in a universal sense, based on the logic that there were no nations and languages ​​at that time.
  And when the arrogant people conceived the mystery of the tower-building, "a great wind of mine and the divinely inspired spirit of wrath, disperse the barracks, and the people uttered my unspoken dialect in the confusion of every one of them."
  It was one of them and Hayk Yapetostian, a famous and brave minister, strong and fat ”(I, T).
  First of all, he cannot blame the gods for the great good of Christendom, and he will not accept that the tower collapsed because of the wind that blew them away because, according to Christians, the world and mankind were set up by the only Creator God.
  Second, the idea of ​​a common human ancestor and universal gods is opposed to a specific pagan religious teaching and is specific to a new type of philosophical scholar, for whom the idea of ​​a common ancestor and division of nations is universal knowledge, new, true knowledge.
  However, it must be said that this non-Christian and non-pagan author is not an unreligious individual, he is a Greek scholar with universal ideas, who respects the Chaldean teachings, who treats piety and religion in the same way as almost cosmopolitan Jews. sometimes the Gnostics, or so-called "globalist" creators.
  But as a philosopher, Mtsurnatsi is really one of the Eucharistic of his time.
  This can be seen even when he says that a tribe of giants descended from the ancient gods and tried to build a dam.
 77 It is known that the Eucharist, as in BC. IV century The followers of the philosopher Euhemerus of Messina differed from the people of the distant past by the small people of later times in their enormous size, physical data, voice, spirit, nature, and so on.
 That is why they became deified when the times changed, that is, when the mythical, prehistoric or epic time was followed by the historical, social, everyday time, they became deified.
  The latter is obviously combined with the post-heroic, post-heroic time, which replaced the epic time of the heroes of the "Sasna Tsrer" epic, that is, with the historical time, when people, becoming their usual current size, became physically and mentally crushed, when wheat is no longer the size of a rose. - a nut, and the soil is weakened, it can not bear the hero.
 It can be thought that Marab Mtsurnatsi also provides some information about himself in the part following the war between Hayk and Bel, when the places of the Armenian Highland are inhabited and endowed with names.
 The country named after Hayk - Hayk, the place where Bel fell - Gerezmanakk, the village built by Hayk - Haykashen, the place where the fathers lived - from the name Hark to the naming of the provinces after Hayk's heirs and the creation of a series of local eponyms (Shara - Shirak, Tsolak - Tsolakert etc.) In order to weave a unique ethnographic history based on it, it is at least necessary to be at least Armenian-speaking, if not Armenian.
 Otherwise, for a foreign scholar, if he did not know or did not know Armenian well, at least he should have worked in an Armenian folklore to collect and bring together that huge material.
  It is clear from what has been said that the author of the original Armenian history is an Armenian who wrote in Greek, and according to Khorenatsi, also in Assyrian.
  It has already been said that Khorenatsi, changing the name of Marab Mtsurnatsi (Mar Aba), nationality (Assyrian), language (also Assyrian), city (Mtsbin), place of business trip (Nineveh), purpose (using the state divan), tried to make history m. թ. a. III-II centuries About Armenia, its king Vagharshak and his successor.
  This article also raises the question of why the first king of the Armenians, Arshakun, was named Vagharshak, in contrast to the two other evidences [3, 4] that have come down to us, Arshak and Trdat, which remain in real history.
  Let us add that the Assyrian theme is Khorenatsi's contribution, isn't it? թ. a . In the III century, when the Arshakuns allegedly ruled in Armenia, the Assyrian script did not exist yet.
 78 It only remains to reveal the connection between Vagharsh II and Marab Mtsurnatsi.
 The point is that the case of Marab Mtsurnatsi, as mentioned by Khorenatsi, required a lot of effort and would not have happened without a sponsor-client.
  It has already been said that the secular elite was more interested in ethnographic topics.
  Especially during the twenty-year reign of the philosopher Emperor Marcus Aurelius (161180), the reputation of the philosophers and the universal sciences grew beyond the empire, forming a kind of high-class taste and demand for spiritual goods in the neighboring courts and ruling elites.
  It is not for nothing that books on new sciences were often found in the royal archives, which may mean that they were also often ordered from the court or government houses.
  It is clear that such an order is given in advance by a well-known educated philosopher, school clerk, royal secretary, or simply a skilled literate person.
  Khorenatsi and Sebios connect the philosopher Marab with the court. the first directly through Vagharshak, the second through Sanatruk, but very indirectly.
  It is alleged that the inscription left by Agatangeghos during the reign of Trdat on a pillar opens from the ruins of Sanatruk's palace, from which Marab Mtsurnatsi's students transcribed it in the teacher's book, where Sebios read the lists of Parthian and Armenian Arshakuns while in Mesopotamia.
  The forger did not even notice that Trdat and Agatangeghos could not take such a thing from the royal court and record such a thing, because their court was not in Mtsbn (Mtsurn), but in Artashat.
  For these and other reasons already mentioned, the data of Sebios' preface to the Confession must be considered fabricated.
 Khorenatsi also invents the story of the creation of his spring, but one thing is certain about him that the client is the court of Mtsbn (read: Mtsurk) during the reign of Vagharshak.
  And the only king who could be the dictator of the name Vagharshak is Vagharsh II Arshakuni, the originator of the hereditary right to the throne and having a residence in Mtsurk.
  And it was he who could order the "Armenian History" from the philosopher Marab Mtsurnatsi in the court, which gave Khorenatsi grounds to send him on behalf of Vagharshak to the Parthian king, Nineveh.
  In fact, as it turned out, the material of the "Early Armenian History" is strictly Armenian and is accessible only to Armenian-speaking philosophers.
  It could not be translated into Greek from the 79 Chaldean manuscripts by order of Alexander the Great.
  His real source informs Khorenatsi about the stories about Aram, without hesitation that he may contradict himself, and quotes the words of Marab Mtsurnatsi. "But though not in the original book, but as Mar Abbas Katina (read Marab the Philosopher - AS) tells, from a small number of people and without a sign, from this cow found this meeting in the royal court" (I, 14).
  Here is the real source of Mtsurnatsi.
  Here is how he explains why there are no references to Aram's heroic deeds in the Chaldean records. "The same man told me another reason, that, as a student, Ninos, with a proud and selfish goal ... ordered many books and conversations in the first place, in places and places to burn deeds of courage ... and to write for his own sake" ( I, 14).
 It is obvious that Marab Mtsurnatsi, emphasizing Aram's international role, considers it his duty to explain why the author of such great works, after whom the Greeks call Armenians Armen and the Persians and Assyrians Armenik, are not known to foreigners.
  Here is a convenient occasion to remember St. for good. Malkhasyants to deny his statement expressed in the above-mentioned quote (p. 10), according to which Khorenatsi had other sources for Aram's works [5].
 We find another subtle evidence in Khorenatsi, from which it can be seen that Marab Mtsurnatsi also took the story of Hayk 7 Bel from the oral tradition. "And Ninos, king of Nineveh, in memory of his ancestor Bela, had Bella in mind, learned in conversation, and thought of repaying this for a long time ... to speak, to erase all the seeds sown by the brave Hayk" (I, XIII).
  It seems that Ninos, having heard the conversations and kept in mind the story of Bel, is arguing with his ancestor.
  This subtle testimony is really of psychological significance to understand that the main source of Marab Mtsurnatsi is oral, if not directly written by him, then at least taken from the records kept in the royal court, or both.
 That is, the stories about Aram, Hayk and Ara were not obliged to be registered in the chronicles of Nineveh.
 And the source of the stories of both Aram and Hayk and Ara is the Armenian oral tradition.
  According to Khorenatsi, Marab Mtsurnatsi collects only what is needed from the main book of "Stories of Nations", he, Khorenatsi, collects only the information about the ancestors from Marab. "And this kind of interlocutor should stop for 80 days, because it is our duty not to write a greeting to history, but to try to show our forebears and the ancient ancestor" (I, T).
  Or. "What follows in today's book (Marabi - AS), but let us arrange what is necessary for our gathering" (I, 12).
  In fact, Khorenatsi is absolutely right about how he selectively took material from Marab Mtsurnatsi's book.
  But here is how selectively Marab used the non-existent book of Nineveh, which can be considered relative.
  Because, as we saw in the example of Abydenos, the list of Armenian ancestors, from Habet to Armen (Hayk) or Aram, that is, up to two Armenian eponyms, could be found in foreign ethnographic books, among other nations.
  However, it was impossible to find plots about the works of the ancestors mentioned in those lists or their heirs in foreign books, they lived fully in the Armenian folklore or were partially preserved in the Armenian diplomatic records.
  So the historian is so right that the list of Armenian ancestors could be extracted from foreign books, but it is not true that the names and deeds of the Armenian ancestors are also written in those books. [6]
  Here it must be said that the historian himself denies himself, saying that "especially because we do not boast about them and do not prosper, the courage and work of foreign nations" (I, 14).
  It is not clear whether Marab Mtsurnatsi also had a desire to cite a written source like Khorenatsi, but perhaps yes, because Khorenatsi's source notes could sometimes have originated from Marab himself.
  For example, after quoting about Paruyr from Marab's book, Khorenatsi adds, it is not clear, his or Marab's words. "Then if you say (to whom's the customer - AS), why do we and our forefathers know their names like this, and many of us and my work, I say, in the furnace of the Chaldeans, Assyrians and Persians, for their names and deeds in the image of the king, as agents and overseers of my world, of those who stood by them and were great biased ”(I, IA).
  It may seem to some that this word definitely belongs to Khorenatsi.
  But if Khorenatsi sends the philosopher Marab on a business trip to the royal court of Nineveh on behalf of Vagharshak, both the question and the answer in that word become unnecessary.
  That is why this word is more appropriate for the real Marab, who uses only the Armenian Divan, and gives a purely logical answer to the question raised by him, that the names and deeds of the ancestors have not disappeared so much, they have been registered somewhere to a small extent. .
  Only they were registered not in Nineveh, but in a number of divans.
  This is what is considered the view of an educated person of the time.
  These people are united not only by the philosophical methodology, but also by the terminology, the style of expression, perhaps the way of addressing and honoring each other (for example, Who is old, wise, etc.).
  However, the preference for a written source and the relevance of any information, albeit a small one, to written sources can be seen as a common feature of Hellenistic scholars, who sought to impart a more reliable knowledge by distinguishing themselves from ordinary clerical information and commentary.
  The philosopher Marab Mtsurnatsi was also one of those scholars who became the first known Armenian historian [7].
 .
