In order to present the peculiarities of the formation and management of the image of organizations in Armenia, it is necessary to conduct a historical study.
  From ancient times Armenia has been famous for metallurgy, pottery, winemaking, silk weaving, carpet weaving, due to which it had a high reputation all over the world.
 On this historical and cultural basis, in 1917, the first republic of Armenia was created.
  Despite the difficult realities of that period, Armenia was able to form an army, open a higher education institution, and establish diplomatic and trade relations with other countries.
  A 191 GOVERNMENT On the basis of the first republic in 1920 the Soviet Socialist Republic of Armenia was proclaimed.
  This period had a great positive impact on the Armenian economy, turning Armenia from an agricultural country into a developed industrial country.
  During those years many factories were built in different spheres: textile, electronic systems, wine and brandy, rubber factories.
 Metal smelters, a chemical plant, and a nuclear power plant were also built, so much so that there was a surplus of electricity and surpluses began to be supplied to neighboring countries.
  Armenia registered a sharp increase in scientific potential.
  The image of Armenia and Armenian products was at the highest level in the whole world.
 It should be noted with regret that the formation of the third republic of Armenia began in very difficult conditions: the devastating Spitak earthquake, the Artsakh movement.
  As a result of the war and the revolutionary change of the economy, the whole economy was destroyed, all the financial means were directed only to procure weapons, factories were closed, everything possible was sold to buy weapons.
  A war was going on, the country was under siege, as a result of all this the image of the Republic of Armenia formed as a result of years of hard work experienced a sharp decline.
  During these difficult years, the privatization process began, and people, being financially illiterate, sold their property at cheap prices.
  The situation changed only after the end of the war, when the flow of foreign investments to Armenia began.
  Foreign investments brought not only financial resources, but also international culture, new elements and features of image formation.
 From the example of Armenia we can clearly say that the images of the state and the organization are interconnected, historically we see that the deterioration of the image of the state leads to the deterioration of the organization and the increase of the image leads to the increase of the trade turnover.
  NOTE 192 GOVERNANCE exists in the same way that organizations have an impact on both their own image and the image of the state.
 It should be noted that the image of the state is influenced not only by organizations, but also by culture, history, society, level of education, scientific potential.
  However, in the 21st century, the business environment has a huge impact, because in case of a decline in the business environment, the country's economy and the living standards of the population will decline, which in turn will lead to a sharp decline in the image.
  In the case of Armenia, as a result of historical developments, technologies passed down from generation to generation, organizations were created, which launched their products on the international market and formed not only the image of their organization, but also strengthened the image of the Republic of Armenia.
  In their advertising policies, Armenian organizations focus on the centuries-old culture and technologies, which, as a result of decades, have proved their qualitative features and have a high position in the international community.
 Upon entering the Republic of Armenia, foreign organizations set themselves the task of quickly restoring products that had been abandoned for years, training specialists, introducing international management standards, and integrating international experience in the Republic of Armenia.
  At present, there are numerous local and foreign organizations in the Republic of Armenia, which with their peculiarities, unique products, management style create the image not only of themselves, but also of the state.
 In order to present all this more clearly, it is necessary to make a sectoral division and reflect on the peculiarities of studying and shaping the image of organizations in each sector.
  This is necessary because each area has its own characteristics and it is necessary to conduct an in-depth study in 193 MANAGEMENT to present a clearer picture. 1. Communication sector, 2. Wine and brandy production sector, 3. Chocolate production sector (confectionery), 4. Information technology sector 5. Services sector (tourism, banking system).
 It is not accidental to mention the communication sphere first in the classification, as "ArmenTel" was one of the first foreign companies to enter the Republic of Armenia in 1995 [1].
  Later, in 2004, VivaCell entered the Armenian market, which still operates today [2].
  Since this organization occupies the first place in the provision of mobile communication, we will study the image of this organization.
  VivaCell is one of the companies with the highest image in Armenia, which has built its image due to years of active work.
  Due to the peculiarity of this field, the decline in the image can be sharp, which in turn will lead to a large influx of consumers, which is why companies in this field strive to be at the highest level of quality.
  The high level of quality creates reliability for the consumer.
  VivaCell, entering the market, started to implement a very interesting policy. It quickly started to build stations throughout the country, maximizing its accessibility, in this case it attracted a wide range of customers and people began to actively use this organization.
  This is due to the fact that the consumer, being in different parts of the country, will always be available due to different circumstances.
  This sharply raised the image of this organization.
  In terms of image promotion, the organization carries out active advertising, organizes or sponsors various events, gives regular customers the opportunity to participate in discounts, provides social packages to its employees. in the organization.
  The organization also excellently implements corporate social responsibility in the areas of environment, social inclusion, human resources, customer service.
  The organization carries out various charitable events, builds houses for the needy, builds water pipes for border communities.
 Thus, as a result of this complex activity, the organizations operating in the given field create their own unique image.
  Mentioning the advantages of the given sphere, the shortcomings of the sphere should also be mentioned.
  Currently, there are 3 operators in the sphere, among which the competition is taking place, but in these conditions of competition, the price of the services provided is still high for the citizens of Armenia.
 Referring to the sphere, it is necessary to touch upon the peculiarities of the sphere, which is connected with entering the market of organizations.
  Entering is a very difficult process, both from a legal and financial point of view.
  In order not to delve into the legislative regulations, we can consider the large financial costs associated with the construction of stations in mountainous areas, the construction of stations on the roofs of buildings in urban conditions, the construction of a fiber-optic network.
 Let's talk about the wine and brandy production sectors, whose image is at the highest level.
 The Republic of Armenia is famous all over the world for its brandy and wine production.
  From ancient times the Armenians were engaged in winemaking and the vivid proof of these words are the findings of human historical value found during the excavations in the Ararat Valley, which clearly prove it.
  According to the well-known history of the Bible, Armenia is considered the homeland of winemaking and viticulture.
  The first winemaker was Noah, who, in his 1953 GOVERNMENT, stopped at the foot of Mount Ararat with an ark and planted his first vine.
  The grapes of the Ararat valley are the best in the Caucasus.
  The Republic of Armenia is famous for its "Ararat" brand cognacs, which have a high image all over the world.
 It is not accidental that every tourist, being in the Republic of Armenia, must definitely buy and take brandy or wine with him.
  Armenian brandy and wine are in great demand abroad.
  Even if Armenians go abroad and do not take Armenian brandy to their relatives and friends, it leads to great "troubles".
 The next area is the service sector.
  It is very diverse and multifaceted, that is why it is necessary to study the influence of the sphere on the formation of the image.
  Mainly, the provision of services contributes to the development of tourism, which is directly related to the development of the country and raising its image.
 The Republic of Armenia is becoming more and more attractive for tourists every year. According to statistics, Armenia has registered an increase in the number of tourists arriving in Armenia in 2019, about 1.9 million tourists, which is 14.7% more than the number of arrivals in 2018. [4]
  According to a barometer published by the World Tourism Organization on February 4, Armenia ranked 12th in the world in 2019 among the fastest growing destinations in the field of tourism.
  According to various international magazines, Armenia is included in the list of 10 tourist countries to visit.
  The sphere of services, the attitude of the Armenian people and the state support to the sphere contributed to the registration of such indicators.
  It is noteworthy that the positive opinion of any tourist about the travel company, the services provided, the state creates the image of the organization and the state.
  Of course, a negative opinion affects the image in the same way, in a negative direction, and the registered results are proof that the positive prevails, but it does not mean that everything is ideal.
 GOVERNANCE In general, referring to the sphere, the latter is of strategic importance for the state, as this sphere directly creates the image of the state, raises international recognition.
  The sphere is completely liberalized both legally and financially.
  Any company that wants to operate here can easily enter the market.
  Tourism contributes to the development of the sector, in particular, the influx of tourists contributes to the development of the hotel sector, the development of tourist attractions (eg Tatev, Dilijan), the development of trade, especially the sale of souvenirs, as tourists want to take some relics with them.
 From the point of view of image, the sphere of chocolate production is also worth paying attention to.
  Armenia is famous for its chocolate production, mainly when it comes to chocolate, everyone remembers their childhood.
  Many people in Armenia associate chocolate with the name of "Grand Candy" company.
  Grand Candy Company was founded in 2000 by Hrant Vardanyan.
  "Grand Candy" company is one of the most successful both in this field and in the Republic of Armenia.
  The company has implemented very interesting marketing policies since its establishment, which has won the trust of the population.
  The main emphasis is on the quality of the product, it is connected with the availability of modern equipment and production lines.
  The company always comes up with a unique taste.
  At present, the company has 400 products, which provides a wide range.
 Consider the marketing steps taken:  Active advertising, which puts a lot of emphasis on introducing their new products to consumers (we can all remember the ad when a child said, "I love Grand Candy very much."
  This advertisement received a great positive response from the population).
 MANAGEMENT  Own delivery network, which first made it possible not to use intermediaries (due to the specifics of the product, special both sanitary and temperature conditions are required).
  It is simply impossible not to return to the famous motorcycles in delivery.
  The sale of the motorcycle caused a direct marketing "boom", when the motorcycle came to a stop in the yard and turned on the popular music, all the children went down to the yard to shop.
  "Grand Candy" company also has branded stores.
  The first of them was "Ponchikanots".
  Currently, "Ponchikanots" is the most favorite place for children.
 Սահմանումը One of the marketing steps is to set a world record in 2010 in the category "Largest Chocolate Bar", which was registered in the Guinness Book.
  This brought recognition not only to the company, but also to the Republic of Armenia, becoming the first industrial record of Armenia.
 Անցկաց Holding charitable events.
 Ելը Taking care of its own employees, even the company has built an elite building with affordable conditions for its employees.
 It should be noted that the products of "Grand Candy" company are in great demand abroad as well.
 Thus, we can say that the company operating in this field has been able to achieve a high level of image formation as a result of its activities.
 The next field, which is a very powerful tool in terms of image formation, is the field of information technologies.
  The Armenian nation has a great contribution to the development of information technologies, of which all Armenians are proud.
  Automatic transmission, color TV, ATM and other inventions were created by Armenian scientists, which changed the life of all mankind and brought great recognition to the Armenian nation.
  The Armenian nation with its engineering mindset became attractive for foreign organizations, some opened their branches, and some made attractive offers and attracted many specialists, which led to the outflow of specialists from the Republic of Armenia.
 Despite the fact that the hostilities and the blockade to some extent pushed back the information technologies, the Armenian engineers were able to train very quickly and have their say in the field of information technologies.
 The Republic of Armenia with its technological potential can respond to market changes and have its investment there.
  Armenia was also introduced to the international community through the "TUMO" center, where teenagers and young people are educated and receive professional knowledge.
  The center has received international recognition and agreements have been signed by the governments of other countries to reopen such centers in their own country.
  One of the largest companies is Synopsys Armenia, a leader in the field of information technologies in Armenia.
 Referring to the service sector, it is also necessary to refer to the banking system, which is one of the most established systems in the Armenian economy.
  Armenia has a stable and strong financial system, where banks dominate.
  The banking system of Armenia has a low concentration, and competitiveness is quite high due to the reduction of the interest margin.
 The banking system is strictly controlled by the Central Bank, which coordinates the entire sector.
  The stability of the Armenian banking system in the face of the financial crisis was a vivid proof of all this, during which no bank went bankrupt.
  The Armenian banking system is highly trusted by international partners.
  Not all countries can be proud of such stability.
 Currently, there are 17 banks in Armenia with 537 branches.
  The number of employees in the banking system is about 12,000 people.
  The sphere has a high quality of service, different types of transactions are carried out.
  The existence of such a system allows different organizations to carry out their activities in a calm manner.
  In order to get a better idea of ​​the banking sector, a survey on the image of "ACBA-CREDIT AGRICOLE BANK" CJSC was conducted among the bank's customers.
  80 customers took part in the survey.
  Below we present the results of the survey: To the question "How often do you use banking services?", 78% of the respondents answered often, 22% - not often.
 To the question "Are you satisfied with the quality of service?", 88% of the respondents answered positively, of which 55% - from the speed of service, 25% - from the friendly attitude and 20% - from the specialization of the employees.
 To the question "Does the interior of ACBA Bank make the bank more attractive?", The overwhelming majority of the respondents, 95%, gave a positive answer.
 To the question "How would you evaluate ACBA Bank's advertising policy on a 5-point scale?", 75% of the respondents answered "5", 14% - "4" and 11% - "3".
 And to the questions "Do you consider the bank reliable", "Will you use the bank's services once again", "Will you advise your relatives to use the bank's services", an unequivocally positive answer was registered.
 In other words, based on the results of the survey, it can be clearly said that the customers highly appreciate the quality of service, the interior, as well as consider the bank reliable.
 Thus, studying all this, we were able to practically study the influence of certain spheres and the peculiarities of image formation in the Republic of Armenia.
  Examples of existing organizations were brought, due to which today Armenia occupies a special place in world history and current reality.
 200 GOVERNANCE The study of the cooperation between the image of the organization and the state was carried out, due to which we can clearly say that when the organization creates its image, it also creates the image of the state.
  The decline of the image of any sphere of the state leads to the decline of the image of the state.
  That is, the creation of the image is the result of complex actions for both the state and the organization.
 .
