The analysis of companies' solvency and financial stability indicators is the most important characteristic of economic activity, which is necessary for both institutional assessment and realistic perception, as well as for predictable results from the point of view of external partners and investors.
  Market participants are always interested in receiving unbiased information on the competitiveness and reliability issues of their partners.
 Solvency and liquidity are interrelated characteristics of financial stability.
  The concept of solvency is more comprehensive, as it is the ability to meet short-term and long-term financial liabilities on time and in full, and liquidity is the ability of a company to repay its short-term liabilities and unforeseen expenses.
 Current liquidity and autonomy ratios are important characteristics of liquidity and solvency assessment.
  The current liquidity ratio shows the extent to which current assets cover current (short-term) liabilities [2, p. 331].
 The current liquidity ratio is calculated by the following formula [1, pp. 129-130]. where: -current liquidity ratio, -current assets, -current liabilities.
 It describes the solvency of an entity, which is assessed in terms of timely payments to debtors (debtors) and the sale of finished goods (favorable), as well as, if necessary, the sale of other items of working capital.
 320 ECONOMICS The current liquidity ratio depends on the industry, the length of the production cycle, the structure of costs and resources [2, pp. 330-331].
 The normative value of the given coefficient is 200% accepted in the international practice.
  If the rate is below 100%, it is a sign of insufficient solvency of the company, and if it exceeds 200%, it is a record of inefficient use of current assets.
 According to the data published by the RA Statistical Committee, in 2018 In the non-financial sector, the companies' current liquidity ratio was 149.2%.
  This means that companies in the non-financial sector are solvent and medium-sized companies can meet short-term liabilities at the expense of existing liquid assets.
 2018 According to the data, the types of activities "Agriculture, forestry and fishing", "Transportation and storage economy" and "Education" provided a rather high index by sectors of the economy, making 208.5%, 239.2% and 207.2%, respectively, which is the non-use of funds, stocks of goods. It is a signal of surplus and ineffective policy, which reciprocates the emergence of excessive lending and bad debts [1, p. 135].
 "Mining and open pit mining" (83.6%), "Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply" (91.9%), "Water supply, sewerage, waste management and recycling" (76.5) %), "Real estate activities" (93.8%) and "Health and social services" (97.8%) sectors of the economy.
  This means that there is a low level of solvency in this sector and there are problems with the repayment of short-term liabilities (Table 1).
 321 ECONOMICS Table 1. Current liquidity ratios of companies in the non-financial sector of the Republic of Armenia by sectors of the economy [5, p. 43] Current liquidity ratio (%) of which by large and Total medium-sized organizations in 2018. Total including: A. Agriculture, forestry and fisheries B. Mining and open pit mining C. Manufacturing D. Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply E. Water supply, sewerage, waste management and recycling 91.9 89.1 11. Sh. 121.1 G. Wholesale and retail trade. Repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles 180.2 189.9 H. Transportation and storage 239.2 318.1 I. Accommodation and public catering 166.9 198.1 J. Information and communication 190.5 195.8 K. Financial and insurance activities L. Real estate activities 93.8 91.2 M. Professional, scientific and technical activities 123.7 156.8 N. Administrative and auxiliary activities 130.7 107.1 322 ECONOMICS O. Public administration and defense. Compulsory social security P. Education Q. Health and social services 97.8 94.0 R. Culture, leisure and recreation 153.1 150.2 S. Other services 103.8 56.5 Low liquidity ratio characterizes the financial instability of the company.
 The value of the current liquidity ratio is conditioned by the following circumstances: spheres of activity, duration of the production cycle, qualitative level of receivables and payables, etc.
  The magnitude of this coefficient can vary in different organizations.
  The deviation of the current liquidity ratio is due to changes in the composition and structure of both current assets and current liabilities [4, p. 351].
 The reasons for the insolvency of the organization may be the violation of contractual obligations for the sale of products, the increase in the cost of products, insufficient amount of financial results, the formation of an unfavorable structure of current assets, etc.
  Maintaining a sufficient level of solvency depends on the optimal ratio of income to expenses [4, p. 354].
 The next important factor is the coefficient of financial autonomy.
  It describes the share of the company's own funds (equity) in total assets.
  This ratio describes the prospects for a change in the company's financial situation.
 It is calculated by the following formula [3, page 350]. where: - autonomy coefficient, - equity, - total assets.
 323 ECONOMICS The higher the autonomy ratio, the more financially stable the company is and independent of external creditors.
  The heads of companies in their management activities distinguish these mutually acceptable thresholds.
  However, in practice, it is accepted that at least half of the company's funding sources must be provided at its own expense.
  Therefore, the coefficient of autonomy is considered "positive" if it is greater than or equal to 50% [1, pp. 425-426].
  And the extremely low index is a threat to the financial stability of the company.
 Analyzing the data published by the RA Statistical Committee, we can state that the corporate autonomy ratio in the non-financial sector was 30.9%, of which 33.8% for large and medium-sized organizations, which indicates that there is some dependence on external creditors in this sector of the economy (Table 2 ).
 2018 According to the data, "Other Services" (71.2%), "Culture, Entertainment and Recreation" (76.3%), "Education" (63.3%) and "Transportation and Warehousing" (52.1%) registered high indicators.
  These indicators testify to the financial stability of these sectors and their independence from external creditors.
 Extremely low levels were provided by "Mining industry and open pit mining" and "Water supply, sewerage, waste management and recycling".
  Equity in these industries has a negative sign, so there are threats to financial stability and a high degree of dependence on external partners.
  2018 "Agriculture, forestry and fishing", "Wholesale and retail trade. Repair of cars and motorcycles "and" Construction "branches.
  This testifies to the degree of financial instability of companies in these sectors and shows that companies have attracted less borrowed funds.
 324 ECONOMICS Table 2. Autonomy coefficients of RA non-financial sector companies by branches of economy [5, p. 45] Autonomy coefficient, of which by large and Total medium-sized organizations in 2018. Total including: A. Agriculture, forestry and fisheries B. Mining and open pit mining C. Manufacturing D. Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply E. Water supply, sewerage, waste management and recycling 37.9 40.1 F. Sh. 29.8 L. Real estate activities 34.9 46.3 M. Professional, scientific and technical activities 24.0 45.5 G. Wholesale and retail trade. Repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles H. Transportation and warehousing I. Accommodation and catering J. Information and communication K. Financial and insurance activities 325 ECONOMICS N. Administrative and support activities O. Public administration and defense. Compulsory social security P. Education 63.3 63.3 Q. Health and social services 40.5 40.5 R. Culture, entertainment and leisure 76.3 78.0 S. Other services 71.2 65.5 The main factors influencing this indicator are the duration of the company's involvement in the field, the peculiarities of the branch. demand for output, product life expectancy, working capital and liquidity.
 Increasing the profitability of products at the expense of domestic reserves, using the full potential of production through increasing product quality (competitiveness), reducing cost-effectiveness, efficient use of material, labor and financial resources, as well as reducing production costs and losses are fundamental directions for improving the financial condition of companies. in the direction.
  At the same time, we must pay attention to the efficient and economical use of resources. Implementation of best practices, introduction of standards and resource-saving technologies, organization of resource use and control, introduction of mechanisms of material and non-material benefit of employees [3, p. 356].
 Economic analysis of market components, supply and demand, optimal design of product range and structure can contribute to the improvement of financial stability.
  In the conditions of financial insolvency and instability, it is necessary to carry out reconstruction of business processes, 326 ECONOMICS to radically review the production program, logistics, transformation of personnel work programs, improvement of product quality, investment and pricing policy.
 .
