Social entrepreneurship, being a type of entrepreneurship based on a social goal, is today an integral part of a social market economy.
 Academic interest in sustainable development is currently growing, as a result of which the active development of social entrepreneurship is important, taking into account that the latter is an important condition for sustainable development and strengthening of the welfare state.
 However, in Armenia and a number of other countries, the notion of social entrepreneurship is severely distorted. There is no clear terminology of this concept, the terms "social entrepreneurship", "social entrepreneurship", "social business" and other terms are found in different literatures, which causes confusion of perceptions.
  However, the activities of social entrepreneurship are often identified with businesses that have elements of charity, or as a purely economically vulnerable working group.
  Accordingly, social entrepreneurship is mainly carried out by civil society organizations.
  2016 According to the adopted legislative amendments, non-governmental organizations can be directly engaged in business activities, but still have to keep a separate record of business activities, which, unlike public activities, is in the center of attention of the tax authorities.
 In the absence of a definition of social entrepreneurship, principles, criteria, assessment of potential risks, measurement of social impact, and lack of legislation, the international experience of social entrepreneurship has been studied, this article emphasizes the clarification of the above issues and proposing possible solutions.
 Unprecedented growth in interest in social entrepreneurship began in the world in the 1990s, due to significant changes in political, economic and environmental strategies, in which entrepreneurship began to be seen as a tool to promote social progress.
  The merging of the entrepreneurial foundations and the social component over the years has led to the development of social enterprises as organizations where economic activity pursues a social goal and tends to bring about social change.
  For centuries, the solution to social problems was considered to be the sole function of the government, centralized or at the local level.
  In time, non-governmental organizations were formed, which undertook the solution of the problems that the state was not able to regulate.
 More recently, the private sector has begun to contribute to the solution of social, environmental and other issues through corporate social responsibility and philanthropy.
  And the latest development of this tendency is the formation of the idea of ​​social entrepreneurship.
  There are different definitions of this term.
  Harvard Innovation Lab presents social entrepreneurship as a social change that breaks stereotypes, regardless of the resources currently available.
  According to the European Union, a social entrepreneur is a person operating in a social economy, whose main goal is to have a social impact, and not to provide profit for its founders or shareholders.
  A social enterprise is a type of organization whose purpose is to solve a social problem by expanding the scale of the problem and ensuring sustainability, often through innovative solutions, generating additional income and even profit.
  [1, pp. 13-14] The idea of ​​social entrepreneurship differs significantly from the basics of traditional entrepreneurship, but in practice there are a number of similarities between the two concepts.
  The term "social entrepreneurship" became popular around the world in the early 1990s, when various organizations began to use business tools to bring about change in the social sphere and the environment.
 Although the definition of social entrepreneurship can vary depending on its size, culture, socio-economic status, it is usually perceived as an organization that practices business for the benefit of man and the environment.
 In the early 19th century, the French economist Jean-Baptiste Sai described the entrepreneur as one who "transfers economic resources from a low-productivity zone to a more productive and lucrative area."
  [4, pp. 28-39] Similarly, the traditional entrepreneur (for example, Henry Ford, Stephen Jobs) changes the productivity of traditional economic resources, and the social entrepreneur, as noted by management theorist Peter Drucker, changes the productivity of society as a whole.
  [3, c. 496] Social entrepreneurs are agents of change who use entrepreneurial tools to provide systemic solutions to social and environmental problems while ensuring their continuity and stability.
  Recent work on social entrepreneurship focuses on the relevance of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and economic development entrepreneurship.
  [6, p 1] One of the oldest (and most comprehensive) definitions was given by J. Gregory Diss in 1998. According to his definition, social entrepreneurs are agents of change who  have a mission to create and maintain social value (not just private value);  seek and find new opportunities to serve that mission;  participate in ongoing innovation, adaptation and training;  act boldly, ignoring current resource constraints; for [7].
 Social entrepreneurship is a type of organization, the purpose of which is to solve any social problem in order to expand the scale of the solution of the given problem and ensure stability, creating additional income and even profit, often giving innovative solutions.
 As social entrepreneurship as such is not considered a legal form, it can be for-profit or non-profit and act as a cooperative, civil society organization, foundation, or charitable organization.
  [2, p. 4] In his work, Samer Abu Saifa defined the concept of "Social Entrepreneur" as a mission-oriented individual who uses a certain set of entrepreneurial behaviors to create some social value for the less privileged through a fully entrepreneurial enterprise. , which is financially independent, self-sufficient and stable.
 This definition combines four factors that distinguish social entrepreneurship from other forms of entrepreneurship.
 Social entrepreneurs. 1. are guided by a mission.
  They serve their mission with devotion to support the needy with their activities.
 2. They operate entrepreneurially through a combination of features that set them apart from other types of entrepreneurs (see Table 1).
 3. Operate in business-oriented organizations based on a strong culture of innovation and openness.
 4. operate in financially independent organizations that plan and implement revenue-based strategies.
  Their goal is to ensure the envisaged social value while remaining financially self-sufficient.
  They achieve this goal by combining social and profit-seeking activities to achieve self-sufficiency, reduce dependence on donations and state funding, and increase the potential for social value proposition.
  [5, p 25] Table 1 presents the distinctive features of for-profit entrepreneurs and social entrepreneurs, as well as the general features.
 89 MANAGEMENT Table 1. Distinctive and common characteristics of for-profit entrepreneurs and social entrepreneurs Unique characteristics of for-profit entrepreneurs  Great achievement  Risk-taking  Organizer  Strategic thinker  Value-creating Unique Features of Entrepreneurs ության Mission Leader ական Emotionally Charged  Change's Agent առաջնորդ Opinion Leader արժեք Socially Valued ոցի Socially Vigilant  Manager  Foresight մեծ Accountability Great Social Enterprise and Non-Governmental Organization , and the main differences are as follows.։ In many cases, NGOs apply for external funding (membership fees, donations, sponsorships, targeted grants, etc.) to support their activities and programs.
  Social enterprises create their own sources of income.
 ։ Many NGOs are accountable for their social impact.
  For social entrepreneurship, social impact is also one of the primary goals of its 90 MANAGEMENT activities, but the financial threshold is also an important factor, as it ensures the stability of the enterprise.
  This boundary is more vividly represented in Figure 1.
  [5, p 26] Figure 1. The scope of entrepreneurship that shows the boundaries of social entrepreneurship Social enterprise also differs from corporate social responsibility.
  Corporate social responsibility is another rapidly spreading phenomenon in the business world, and like social entrepreneurship, it is also distinguished by its ability to be involved in social issues.
  However, social enterprises are created to solve specific social problems, which even the companies with the most firm corporate social responsibility policies cannot aspire to.
 GOVERNANCE The main differences between corporate social responsibility and corporate social responsibility are as follows: ության The company's corporate social responsibility policy focuses on issues related to its core business.
  This means that the company, first of all, determines its field of activity and business model, then only considers the issues related to its choice within itself or in the society.
 ։ The primary goal of the company, regardless of the effectiveness of its corporate social responsibility policy, is to make a profit.
  Without profitability, business cannot be sustainable.
 Consequently, an ordinary company can continue its operations for some time without a corporate social responsibility policy, if it has a problem to ensure its profitability.
  However, in the case of a social enterprise, the social impact it provides is the main purpose of the company's existence.
  Real social entrepreneurship can do the opposite. to continue its activities, suffering losses in a short period of time, if it has a problem of providing social impact.
 When creating a social enterprise, first of all, it is necessary to formulate its goal.
  The purpose of a traditional business is simply to have a specific personal or commercial need for the product or service.
  Sometimes this need may not exist in advance. Most of us did not know that we needed smartphones before they first hit the market.
  However, the social enterprise is created on the basis of social need, which usually means that the problem has already been discovered.
 In many countries, social enterprise does not exist as a separate type of organization, and the term "social enterprise" in many cases is not legally defined.
  However, this does not prevent the establishment of a social enterprise.
  In some countries, non-profit or non-profit organizations are allowed to generate revenue and reinvest it.
  In addition, social entrepreneurship may also have the status of a limited liability company (LLC) or other.
 It is also necessary to align the purpose of the organization and the social entrepreneurship model with local legislation.
 For example, a social initiative seeking to set up a social enterprise to support refugees established in its own country may face legal difficulties, such as the legal restrictions on the employment of refugees and asylum seekers in some countries.
  In this case, it is necessary to change the model of social entrepreneurship and act as a charity or propose a legislative change.
 Principles of Social Entrepreneurship These 7 principles were developed in collaboration with Professor Hans Reits and Muhammad Yunus, who is also the co-founder of the Bangladeshi Independent Bank, Grameen Bank, and a Nobel laureate.
  Yunus presented these principles at the World Economic Forum in Switzerland in 2009, outlining the purpose and approach to social entrepreneurship.
  They identify areas of priority for any organization or individual that are targeted to engage in the field, as well as how financial resources can be managed.
 1. The first principle of social entrepreneurship defines the goals of the latter, which is to overcome poverty, to deal with education, food, health, the environment and other issues that allow access to resources for vulnerable groups in society.
  The sole purpose of such ventures is not to maximize profits or shareholder wealth.
 2. The second principle is to ensure financial and economic stability.
  Not every social enterprise is allowed to attract external funds, such as grants from non-governmental organizations.
 Those who are engaged in entrepreneurship should make an investment.
 3. The third principle is the return on investment.
  Social entrepreneur investors can not get more money back from their business than their investments.
  No dividend is given from the investment.
  Investors should take only what they have invested.
 4. The money earned from investments should be returned to promote and improve entrepreneurship.
  Here the expansion is aimed at making more people available or improving the quality of services.
 5. Social enterprise must be responsible for the welfare of the environment.
  It must play a major role in improving the environment, directly or indirectly.
  Contributing indirectly means that the organization's operations will not harm the environment.
 6. The labor force will receive a market salary in better working conditions. Emphasis is placed on providing benefits in the workplace, establishing long-term relationships with the employer, and providing a pleasant work environment.
 7. Since the problem of social entrepreneurship is not to achieve maximum profit, only those who have a great desire to contribute to society and the environment will run a social business.
  This means that the business will operate in a pleasant and not stressful environment.
  [11] GOVERNANCE The principles of social entrepreneurship have different categories in different works, below is another classification defined by the World Trade Organization.
  It can also be a useful guide for ensuring the ethics of a social enterprise.
 1) Opportunities for economically vulnerable producers. Many social enterprises cooperate with economically vulnerable groups and should seek to help them move from the threshold of income and poverty to economic stability and ownership, even if they later become independent entrepreneurs.
 2) Transparency and accountability. Social entrepreneurship must be in transparent governance and trade relations.
  It is accountable to all its stakeholders and must respect the vulnerability of trade information provided and maintain confidentiality.
  The organization finds appropriate, participatory ways to involve employees, members of the organization, and manufacturers in its decision-making processes.
  [10] 3) Fair trade practice. The social enterprise must take into account the social, economic and environmental well-being of the marginalized small producers, instead of maximizing its own profit at their expense.
 4) Payment of a fair price. The organization defines it as "socially acceptable and fair remuneration by producers (in the local context), taking into account the principle of equal pay for women and men".
 5) Exclusion of child labor and forced labor. Social enterprises must be familiar with international conventions on the rights of the child, as well as with local labor law.
 GOVERNANCE 6) Elimination of discrimination, ensuring gender equality, economic empowerment of women and ensuring freedom of association. Social enterprises must eliminate discrimination in all their recruitment, training, promotion or dismissal activities.
  Social enterprises must also recognize the rights of women to full employment and ensure the full payment of employment benefits provided by law for women, and must respect the right of all their employees to form unions, join trade unions and conduct collective bargaining.
 7) Ensuring appropriate working conditions. Social enterprises must provide a safe and healthy work environment for their employees and / or members.
 8) Capacity building. Social enterprises should contribute to the development and strengthening of the skills and abilities of their employees or members.
 9) Promotion of fair trade. Social enterprises must provide their customers with information about the organization, the products offered and the organizations that produce them or their members.
 It is always necessary to use honest advertising and marketing techniques.
 10) Environmental protection. "Among other environmentally friendly technologies, social enterprises should make the most of the sustainable sources of raw materials available in their regions, if possible by purchasing from local producers and using energy-saving or renewable, energy-efficient technologies to minimize greenhouse gas emissions."
  [1 pp. 53-54] 96 GOVERNANCE The 7 principles of social entrepreneurship are followed by organizations around the world.
  Forbes 2019 lists the world's most influential and innovative social entrepreneurship companies, such as ME to WE Ashoka, Omidyar Network, NIKA Water Company in the USA, Graeme Bank, Goodwill and others.
  [9] The principle of the 7 "Pi" of social entrepreneurship marketing in the 1960s, E. Jerome McCarthy first proposed a model that included the four factors beginning with the letter "Pi", which were revised in the 1980s by three more similar factors.
  When choosing a social enterprise marketing approach, it is necessary to consider each of these factors and answer the relevant questions of the organization.
 1. Product. What product or service does your company offer?
  What is the quality of the product / service?
  Does it solve any problems for the customer?
 2. Price. What is the value of the product or service offered to the customer?
 3. Geographical area (place). Is the offered product or service available at the time and place preferred by the customer?
 4. Promotion. How is your product / service advertised and presented?
 5. People. Who is responsible for the sales, customer service, communication and other functions of the social enterprise?
  Do they have the necessary skills?
 6. Process. What other steps of a social enterprise affect the level of customer satisfaction?
 7. Packaging. What does the offered product look like, what message does it convey to the customers?
 .
