At the beginning of the 21st century, corruption became widespread and became a global problem.
  It made many manifestations, covering all branches of the state apparatus, including various public relations.
  Traditionally, the corruption crimes with the highest public danger, the totality of which is bribery, are receiving bribes, from which bribery is also derived.
 A study of legal practice shows that in the current situation, the best way to detect bribery is to carry out an operative-investigative measure, that is, to imitate the giving or receiving of bribes.
  It is in fact the only way to fight corruption that does not require large-scale legislative measures1.
  However, it should be emphasized that a person who voluntarily informs the law enforcement agencies and cooperates with them must show passive behavior, otherwise it will be a "bribery provocation" 2.
 Confirmation of the fact of corruption is one of the most difficult circumstances to prove.
  This observation is conditioned by the fact that, unlike other crimes, it is committed by mutual consent of both parties, the bribe-taker and the bribe-taker, who seek to conceal the crime.
  The significance of the "imitation of bribery or bribery" operative-investigative measure lies in the fact that it not only gives an opportunity to "track down" the actions of the bribe-taker or the bribe-giver, but also to control the whole process of the crime, fix the fact of committing a crime, in particular bribery. , which can be used in criminal proceedings to prove the guilt of the offender.
 The probative value of the results of this operative-investigative measure is exercised by the fact that it provides undeniable information about the commission of a crime.
  Therefore, taking into account the mentioned circumstance, we consider it necessary to comprehensively study the conditions of legality of the implementation of the discussed OSH, to identify the gaps in the legislation, offering adequate solutions.
 According to Article 14, Part 1, Clause 16 of the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activity, an operative-investigative measure in the imitation of receiving or giving a bribe may be carried out during operative-investigative activity.
  Article 30 of the same law stipulates that the operative-investigative measure in question may be carried out only for the detection of the crime of receiving or giving a bribe, exclusively on the basis of a written statement of the person who received the offer to receive or give a bribe.
  As for the concepts of "receiving a bribe" and "giving a bribe", they must be interpreted in the sense of the RA Criminal Code.
 From the system analysis of the above-mentioned provision it becomes obvious that the simultaneous existence of the following conditions is necessary for the execution of the mentioned operative-investigative measure. 1. If it is aimed at revealing the crime of bribery or giving a bribe, such concepts are interpreted within the meaning of the RA Criminal Code.
     2. If there is a written statement of the person who received the offer to receive or give a bribe.
 Let us touch upon each of them and raise the possible problems that arise in the legal practice in the conditions of the existing formulations.
 First of all, it follows from the above that "imitation of receiving or giving a bribe" OSH can not be carried out to detect alleged criminal acts that are not considered a crime of receiving or giving a bribe.
  In other words, in relevant cases, the implementation of the operative-investigative measure subject to discussion cannot be considered lawful.
 This follows from the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights, which provides for a minimum safeguard to prevent abuse of power in secret control activities, inter alia, by clearly defining in law the nature of the crimes which may be grounds for obtaining an intervention. .
  Therefore, the spatial interpretation of the scope of crimes will lead to the violation of the legitimate interests of the rights of the person guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
 In the context of the above, the question arises whether the "imitation of receiving or giving a bribe" can be committed in addition to the crimes provided for in Articles 311 31 312 of the RA Criminal Code, for example, receiving illegal remuneration by a public servant, free will of the voter. to detect crimes that impede implementation.
 The RA Court of Cassation expressed a legal position on the above-mentioned issue in the decision on K. Jazhoyan, stating that the "imitation of receiving or giving a bribe" OSH cannot be carried out in order to reveal the features of a crime envisaged by Article 3111 of the RA Criminal Code.
  The mentioned position is substantiated by the fact that otherwise the terms "illegal payment" and "bribery" will be the same, while according to Part 2 of Article 5 of the RA Criminal Code, the application of the criminal law by analogy is prohibited4.
 In the conditions of the current legal regulation, when in the RA Criminal Code the legislator uses different concepts - to receive bribes, to receive illegal remuneration, we agree with the legal position expressed by the RA Court of Cassation.
 Besides, we find that there is no common notion of the terms "receiving a bribe" and "giving a bribe" in the RA Criminal Code, which leads to misinterpretations.
  This is substantiated by the fact that the terms "bribery" and "bribery" used in a number of crimes envisaged in the RA Criminal Code have been used in different meanings, which does not follow from the requirements of Part 4 of Article 36 of the RA Law on Legal Acts. According to the normative legal act, when defining the same concept or expressing the same idea, the same words, terms or phrases must be used in a certain order, just as different concepts cannot be used with the same term.
 By the above-mentioned decision, the RA Court of Cassation, referring to some issues in the legislation related to the possibility of committing a crime to detect a crime of illegal payment by a public servant, did not address another important issue, in particular, which articles of the RA Criminal Code The imitation of "receiving or giving a bribe" can be done by the OSM.
 In other words, can it be committed for the purpose of revealing the crimes envisaged by Articles 1542, 200, 201 of the RA Criminal Code?
  The controversial issue is that, unlike the illegal payment of a public servant, the legislature used the terms "bribe" and "bribe" in the crimes under discussion.
  In particular, Part 1 of Article 200 of the RA Criminal Code establishes criminal liability for bribery of an employee of an commercial or other organization, arbitrator, including an arbitrator, auditor or lawyer performing functions in accordance with the arbitration law of a foreign state, ie illegally To promise, offer or provide money, property, property rights, securities or any other advantage to them or through another person, in person or through an intermediary, in order to act or not to act in favor of the bribe-giver or the person representing him.
  And according to Article 1542 of the RA Criminal Code, the legislator considered it a crime to take bribes from candidates in person or through a mediator on the condition of voting for or against one of the candidates, participating in the elections or refusing to participate in the elections.
 In the context of the legal positions expressed on K. Jazhoyan by the above-mentioned decision of the RA Court of Cassation, it is impossible to give an unequivocal answer to the question under discussion, as although the terms "accept bribe" and "give bribe" are used in the mentioned crimes, their content differs significantly from Article 311 of the RA Criminal Code. հաս from the concepts used in Articles 312.
  To substantiate what has been said, let us bring only one obvious example. The concept of "receiving a bribe" used in part 1 of Article 1542 of the RA Criminal Code includes only the transfer of the object of the bribe to the recipient of the bribe, as the disposition of the article clearly states the actions for which the bribe is paid, ie one of the candidates. the condition of voting for or against, participating in the elections or refusing to participate in the elections.
  In other words, the concept of receiving a bribe does not include the purpose of its fulfillment, such as demanding, accepting the promise to receive, accepting the offer.
 In contrast, the legislator, defining the concept of "receiving a bribe" in Part 1 of Article 311 of the RA Criminal Code, included in it the purpose of execution, that is, any action by an official within the scope of his authority in favor of the bribe-giver or the person representing him. to do or not to do, or to facilitate or not to do so by using his or her official position, or to sponsor or permit the service.
 It turns out that the legislator, although he used the same terms, that is, "receiving a bribe" or "giving a bribe", but meant different meanings in different crimes, which is unacceptable in the context of the RA Law on Legal Acts.
 Taking into account the mentioned circumstance, we consider that it is necessary to make relevant changes in the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities, to link the possibility of performing "imitation of receiving or giving bribes" to the OSH, and not to connect "receiving" or "giving bribes". but with the detection of specific crimes envisaged by the special part of the RA Criminal Code.
  In other words, we propose to directly list all the crimes, which will be considered lawful for the detection of the crimes under consideration.
 Moreover, let us pay attention to the fact that the legislator did not in any way refer to the possibility of implementing the OSH discussed in order to reveal the mediation of bribery.
 In order to make the issue more visible, let's analyze the following situation, find out the legality of carrying out an operative-investigative measure in the imitation of receiving or giving a bribe.
 Situation 1. Official A., having been informed in advance by his secretary that his neighbor G. had made an appointment with him, wants to ask for help with the performance of his official duties, realizes that G. is preparing to offer a bribe to him; he decides to inform the law enforcement bodies about it; he gives a written statement.
  The law enforcement bodies, in the manner prescribed by law, "imitated receiving a bribe" from the OSH, arrested G. at the moment of transferring the bribe.
  During the investigation of the case, it turns out that there are features of bribery mediation in G.'s act, as some D. gave money to G. և to ask to find an official who can solve the problem that worries him.
 It follows from the above-mentioned problem that the "imitation of receiving a bribe" was done not for giving a bribe, but for the purpose of revealing bribery, of course, with the distant goal of identifying the bribe-giver and prosecuting him.
  We consider that the OSH made in the situation under discussion cannot be considered lawful և its results can not be used as admissible evidence, as it was made for the purpose of revealing bribery, which the legislator did not envisage.
  It turns out that its results cannot be used to prove G.'s mediation.
 In addition, the question arises as to whether the results of the OSH committed in the present situation can be used by D. to establish the fact of bribery or not, as the legislator has provided the possibility of committing it in order to reveal the crime of bribery.
   We find that in this case "the answer to this question is negative" for the following reason: 1. As a result of the OSH, the fact of transfer of the bribe was not directly confirmed by the bribe-giver, but by the mediator.
  In order to confirm the fact of giving a bribe, it is first necessary to prove the existence of an agreement between the bribe-giver and the "bribe broker".
     2. In addition, the results of the CIS under consideration may not be used as admissible evidence to establish the guilt of a bribe-giver under the rule that "the fruit of a poisonous tree is poisonous".
  According to the theory "the fruits of a poisonous tree are poisonous", the evidence obtained on the basis of factual data obtained in violation of the law is also inadmissible.
  The RA Court of Cassation has taken a legal position on the mentioned issue with the decision on A. Sargsyan, according to which the factual information obtained as a result of the legal action, regardless of its significance for the case, loses its legal force, the probative value cannot be included in a specific criminal case. in the combination of evidence in the case վել to be the basis of the accusation 5.
 The decision of the RA Court of Cassation on J. Sefilyan, which clarified some criteria of the "poisonous tree fruits" theory, is also important on the issue under discussion. In particular, it was stated that even for evidence based on illegally obtained data, it is necessary to declare inadmissible inadmissible. There is no way to get that proof by reasonable effort.
  In other words, along with the criterion of "derivation" there is also the criterion of "absence of causal connection", the essence of which is that the evidence can be considered admissible if the state could obtain that data with reasonable efforts6.
 In the context of the above legal positions, we can state that the factual data obtained as a result of the "bribery imitation" as a result of the OSH, that is, the fact of transferring the bribe, could not be confirmed in any other way.
  It turns out that the law enforcement bodies were deprived of the opportunity to get the given evidence with reasonable efforts.
  Therefore, the resulting evidence must be declared inadmissible.
 Thus, we can state that the results of the OSH in this case can not be used as admissible evidence, moreover, the other evidence arising from it must be declared inadmissible, so neither the bribe-giver nor the bribe-taker can be blamed. on the basis of approval.
 Let us now turn to the second condition of the "imitation of receiving or giving a bribe" of the OSH, according to which the written statement must be given exclusively by the person who received the offer to receive or give a bribe.
 Under the above-mentioned legal regulations, a conscientious official can in no way make a written statement to the law enforcement bodies without being held criminally liable.
 It should be noted that due to the high public risk of receiving bribes, now the moment of completion of the crime has been moved to an earlier stage, envisaging criminal liability not only for actually receiving the bribe, but also for demanding, receiving a promise or accepting an offer.
  It should be noted that the above-mentioned legal regulation was established by the RA Law "On Making Amendments and Addenda to the RA Criminal Code" adopted on February 9, 2012, the adoption of which was conditioned by the international obligations of the Republic of Armenia and the need to fight corruption effectively.
 In addition, unlike the norm establishing criminal liability for bribery, in the case of bribery, the legislature did not provide an incentive, that is, a norm establishing the possibility of acquittal on the basis of voluntary reporting of a crime.
  As a result, a deadlock is created for the official who wants to perform his duties in good faith ել to contribute to the fight against corruption, because in a case when he has not yet been offered a bribe, but he is definitely aware of such information, he can not make a written statement և in the other case, when he accepted the offer to take a bribe, ie the crime of taking a bribe was over, but applied to the law enforcement agencies, giving a written statement, he is not released from criminal liability due to the lack of an incentive norm.
 We consider that such a situation is unacceptable է hinders the organization of an effective fight against corruption, as it objectively deprives officials wishing to cooperate with law enforcement agencies of acting in the interest of legality.
  Therefore, we propose to make relevant amendments to the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities, to give an opportunity to give a written statement not only to the person who accepted the bribe or bribe offer, but also to those who are definitely aware of a specific case of making such a proposal in the future.
 There is another legal gap in the current legal regulations.
  In particular, the bribe-taker, a key participant in the bribery chain, is deprived of the opportunity to make a written statement on the basis of which law enforcement agencies can make the appropriate OSH, that is, imitate bribery.
  We consider it necessary to emphasize that the lack of imitation of bribery mediation is a serious legislative omission, which excludes the cooperation of the bribe mediator and the law enforcement body.
 To present the legal issue more visibly, let's bring the following example. Situation 2. A. wants to be hired illegally է asks his neighbor B. to help him with that.
  B., who was in friendly relations with official G., undertakes a mediation mission.
  However, after giving his consent, B. changes his mind և wants to inform the law enforcement bodies about it in order to catch the perpetrators of the crime ենթարկ to bring them to criminal responsibility.
 In the situation presented in the quoted request, B. is deprived of the opportunity to cooperate with the law enforcement bodies, as the legislator did not envisage the "Imitation of bribery mediation" OSH.
  It should be noted that the existence of the OSH under discussion lies in the fact that it has a bipolar orientation. In one case, it is aimed at identifying the bribe-taker, and in the other, at identifying the bribe-giver.
 We consider it necessary to emphasize that even in the case when the bribe-taker transfers the bribe to the official, the bribe-taker, it is not lawful to carry out an operative-investigative "imitation of bribery", as the bribe-giver is not the bribe-giver, but the bribe-taker.
  In the context of the legal positions expressed by the decision of the RA Court of Cassation on K. Jazhoyan, the results of the operative-investigative measure "Imitation of giving a bribe" based on the written statement of the bribe mediator will be recognized as inadmissible.
 Proceeding from the above, we propose to envisage in the RA Law on Operative-Investigative Activities the possibility of "Imitation of Bribery Mediation" OSH, which will solve the gap in the law enforcement practice.
 .
