In any democratic civil society, the incumbent holder and owner of power is the people, who exercise it mainly through elections.
  Considering this circumstance, the conceptual thinker Immanuel Kant in his work "Metaphysics of Morals" states that only the ability to choose qualifies a person as a citizen1.
  The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia proclaims the principle of democracy, which is mainly implemented through the exercise of the right to vote.
  The activities of the representative bodies elected by the people, in their turn, affect all the elements of the state structure, so it is difficult to imagine a modern democratic state without a properly introduced electoral system.
 Article 48 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia contains the basic provisions related to the suffrage of citizens.
  Thus, the citizens of the Republic of Armenia who have reached the age of eighteen have the right to vote and participate in referendums.
 2015 The constitution amended by the referendum has adopted a new approach to restricting human rights.
  In particular, the grounds for any restriction of any right, including the right to vote, are exhaustively defined by the Constitution.
  In this regard, the fourth point of Article 48 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia defines the cases of restriction of the right to vote, according to which to vote and to be elected, to participate in referendums can not be inherited). 4 p. 235. 360 JURISDICTION 1. 1. persons declared incompetent by a court decision, 2. persons convicted by a verdict that has entered into legal force for intentionally committed grave crimes and are serving a sentence.
 Citizens convicted of other crimes and serving their sentences also do not have the right to be elected.
 Although the mentioned constitutional norm reflects the requirements of the European regional and universal international-legal documents ratified by the Republic of Armenia, nevertheless the issue had a unique conceptual manifestation in different periods of the formation of the Armenian statehood, the experience of which can be instructive in the modern period.
 In this article we will try to highlight the experience of the "Armenian" pre-Soviet period of restriction of citizens' suffrage.
 Having been deprived of statehood for centuries, the Armenian legal thought did not stop looking for ways to get out of Turkish-Persian rule and create an effective system of state governance.
 The first such attempt can be considered the work of Shahamir Shahamiryan "Ambush of Glory" in 1773, in which, in addition to a number of issues of constitutional law, elections are also presented as a way of forming authorities.
  Thus, the 14th chapter of the work says: All positions in the Armenian world are elective.
  People are elected from each province, which has up to 12 thousand houses.
  As many people as are elected, casting lots between them, again two people are elected, who are given the right to sit in the chair of the Armenian House and be the deputy of 12 thousand houses.
 The author makes an interesting reference to the issue of restriction of the right to vote, noting that the right to vote (passive suffrage) would be limited only by moral features, in particular, reserving the right to vote and be elected "born in Armenia, a meek and humble person".
  In fact, Shahamir Shahamiryan considered the coordinate plane of the exercise of the right to vote (active suffrage) at that time to be considered by the civil society, as the meekness and generosity of the citizen logically follows from the latter being educated and a number of other moral qualities.
  Consequently, the citizens of that category could only refrain from the temptation to become a subject of electoral bribery.
 No less remarkable is another valuable monument that is a jewel of the Armenian legal and political thought - the "Armenian National Constitution" adopted by the Turkish-Armenians in 1860.
 It also contains detailed provisions on suffrage.
  Thus, according to the Document, the right to vote was reserved for persons over twenty-five years of age who were subjects of the Ottoman Empire3.
  Here the main criterion of the right to vote was to pay a national fee (at least seventy-five thousand gross annual fees per year) and to have personal merit, which referred to those in the royal courts and other positions, doctors, authors of useful books, teachers and other services to the nation. .
  The mentioned document, in addition to the censorship of the right to vote, also fixed the grounds for the restriction of that right.
  Thus, the following persons were deprived of the right to vote in court: անձ persons convicted of criminal offenses who, according to the law, were politically dead to the state; ված those caught in fraud in the administration of national affairs who had been convicted by one of the National Assemblies; Shahamir Shahamiryan. Translated from the Old Armenian by P. Khachatryan, Yerevan, Armenia, 2002 page 78 National Constitution of Armenia, K. of "Constantinople-Istanbul" printing house Mihendisian, 1863, Article 66 National Constitution of Armenia, "Constantinople-Istanbul" printing house Y. Mihendisian, 1863, Article 65 362 JURISDICTION  as well as incurable mental patients suffering from insanity 5.
 If according to Shahamiryan the restrictions on the right to vote had a purely moral basis, then according to the "National Constitution" both the censorship of the right to vote and the cases of restriction were much wider, which in fact included the moral aspects of the act (being caught for fraud). ).
 The realization of the suffrage of the population of Eastern Armenia, which was part of the Russian Empire, was more unique.
  During the political and economic crisis, on August 5, 1905, Tsar Nicholas II signed a manifesto establishing a "legal-consultative" Duma.
  According to the document, the election of the deputies of the Bulignin Duma was to be carried out by the state electoral assemblies of the voters, that is, the institution of mediated elections was introduced.
 In particular, the right to vote for the Deputies was reserved for the following 4 curiae (electoral groups): landowners with at least 100 deciats of land, citizens with property of not less than Rs 1,500, and the authorities of the Volosts and Stations6.
 As can be seen from the above, the tsarist document provided for rather high property censorship for the right to vote, as a result of which broad sections of the society - women, military, students 7, the poor of the city, convicts8 and others were deprived of the right to vote9.
  About 15 million subjects of the empire were endowed with the right to vote, which was the National Constitution of the Armenian nation, the printing house of "Constantinople-Istanbul" Y. Mihendisian, 1863, Article 67 F. Ն. Samoilov, "How the Elections Were Made in the Time of Tsarism" Yerevan, State Publishing House 1937, page 5 State Assembly, August 5, 1905. Article 6, Ibid., Article 7 Москва, Высша էջ школа, 1968, p. 265 363 JURISDICTION 1/3 of the population10.
  This circumstance proves that the principle of general suffrage was missing, as a result of which the formation of state power became the monopoly of the exclusively wealthy class, undermining the idea of ​​democracy.
 The role of suffrage was re-evaluated in 1918. With the formation of the First Republic of Armenia.
  It should be taken into account, of course, that the difficult historical-political period posed serious challenges to the government of the First Republic, and as a result, in the National Council of Armenia formed in the same year, there were not elected, but appointed deputies.
  An interesting incident was registered in this connection during the opening of the 73rd sitting of the Parliament on February 28, 1919, when exclamations were heard from the society. "We do not want such a parliament", "We demand an elected parliament", "Out self-proclaimed deputies" 11.
  The explanation given by the Social-Democratic Faction of the RA Parliament on the draft provisional charter of the Armenian Parliamentary elections states: "... such an arrangement of things could be merged only temporarily, so that, at the first opportunity, the fairest possible elections should be held on the basis of the principle of universal suffrage."
 Taking into account the above, the law "On Parliamentary Elections of Armenia" adopted in 1919 already regulates in detail the procedure for holding elections.
  In particular, the Parliament of the Republic of Armenia is elected by the population without gender discrimination, on the basis of general and equal suffrage, through direct elections and secret ballot, using the comparative representation of the State House, Vyupusk N2 (68), page 5 Minutes of the Parliament of the Republic of Armenia 1918-1920 , Yerevan, National Archives of Armenia, 2009, p. 216 National Archives of Armenia, Fund 198, list 2, case 64 364 JURISDICTION.
  Article 2 of the law states that citizens of both sexes of the Republic of Armenia, who have reached the age of twenty on the day of the elections, enjoy the right to participate in the Parliamentary elections.
  When the law was adopted, the issue of the suffrage of those who were in military service became a subject of discussion13.
  In the end, it is decided that those who are in real military service do not have the right to participate in the elections.
  On this occasion, the explanation of the Minister of Defense Akhverdov about the inexpediency of the participation of the military servicemen in the elections is remarkable, in which it is said in particular: "... for the army to be united and obey the will of the government, it must be neutral" 14.
  Those who were legally declared insane or insane, as well as deaf people who were subject to guardianship, did not participate in the elections.
 Article 5 of the law refers to the cases of deprivation of the right to vote. thus had no right to vote and to be elected: 1. Those whose rights have not been restored earlier and who have been convicted by legally binding judgments: a) Less than ten years after serving the sentence and serving their sentence b) Who have been sentenced to deprivation or restriction of rights Less than five years have passed since he was deported, transferred to a correctional facility, locked up in a correctional facility, imprisoned in a prison or jail, and served his sentence.
 2. Which are convicted for theft, fraud, sale or waste of proxies, concealment of theft, purchase and pledge of open theft, forgery, minutes of the sittings of the Parliament of the Republic of Armenia 1918-1920 Amatuni Virabyan, Yerevan, National Archives of Armenia, 2009 page National Archives of Armenia, Fund 198, list 2, case 84 365 JURISDICTION for bribery, corruption, bribery, as well as pimping and prostitution, as well as for acts aimed at disrupting the freedom and regularity of the election of legislatures and autonomous bodies and not yet three years after the sentence past.
 3. The debtors who have been declared malicious bankrupts on the basis of judicial decisions that have gained legal force, and not more than three years have passed since that recognition. Paragraph 8 of the same article adds that "those who will be deprived of their liberty during the elections or on the basis of legally binding judgments or who will be brought to justice by the judiciary as defendants in a crime and as a precautionary measure against them; They will be elected to be under the supervision of a guard, they will also not have the right to participate in the elections.
 In fact, there are three very important differences between the current Electoral Code of the Republic of Armenia (the constitutional law) and the Law on Parliamentary Elections of the First Republic of Armenia.
  First of all, the deaf people did not have the right to vote, which in the modern sense of the law is not a ground for declaring them incapable at all.
  Second, those sentenced to imprisonment did not regain the right to vote immediately after serving their sentence, nor could they participate in elections during the repayment period.
 Finally, detainees were also deprived of the right to vote, which downplayed the principle of the presumption of innocence.
 In the light of these provisions, 1919 The first and only parliamentary elections took place in the First Republic of Armenia on June 21-23.
 .
