Breast milk has been considered sterile for decades, and some growth factors in breast milk have been thought to produce beneficial microflora in the baby's gut [1-3].
 Recent studies have shown that breast milk contains probiotic bacteria, which form a healthy gut microflora.
 2003 The two study groups independently isolated and described lactic acid bacteria from breast milk [4: 5].
 Unlike other stable microbiota in other organs, such as the vagina and intestines, the breast microbiota is temporary.
  In healthy women, it forms in the last trimester of pregnancy and persists until the end of lactation.
 The bacteria in breast milk are caused by the sharp differences in the composition of the intestinal microbiota of children fed with breast milk and artificial mixtures.
  There are limited studies on the analysis of commensal or potential probiotic bacteria in the milk of healthy women [1, 3, 4].
  Previously isolated bacteria were mainly staphylococci, streptococci, micrococci, lactobacilli 265 and enterococci [1, 2, 6, 7].
  However, later studies have shown that breast milk contains various types of lactobacilli, lactococci and other lactic acid bacteria with probiotic potential [3, 8, 9].
  The presence of these microorganisms is the main condition for the colonization of the intestinal microflora of newborns in breast milk.
  The fact that these bacteria, isolated from breast milk of healthy women, have been isolated in different countries, testifies to their prevalence.
 Therefore, they should be considered as a normal microbiota of breast milk and mammary glands, and not a contamination.
 Thus, breast milk is considered a source of probiotic bacteria [1-3], which protects newborns from various infectious diseases.
  It has been suggested that if a woman regularly takes a probiotic strain preparation from the 6th month of pregnancy, it is later found in breast milk [2, 3].
 The aim of this work is to study the probiotic properties of bacteria isolated from breast milk in order to use them later in medicine.
 Material and methods.
  The research material is the strains of Lactobacilli and Lactococci isolated from the breast milk of Armenian women, as well as Escherichia coli MDC 5003 O157.
 H7, Candida albicans MDC 8013 test strips, received from the Bacterial Deposit Center of "ArmBiotechnology" of NAS RA.
 The following media were used: LAPTg agar and broth [10], tryptose agar (Ferak Berlin), whole broth Nutrient broth standart 1 (Serva), Aikman medium [9] and materials: methylene blue, bile (Micromaster), Gram staining collection (Gram Staining Set, Ghatran, IIR), hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2), oxidase disks (HiMedia), skim milk, L-arginine (Sigma), NaCl, NaOH, Nessler's solution and sterile paper disks.
 The resistance of CBT strains to different concentrations of 20% bile, 2.0 - 6.5% NaCl and NaOH was studied in LAPTg broth, separation of ammonia from arginine with Nestler solution, and increase in 0.1% methylene blue in skim milk.
 Antimicrobial activity was determined on 266 agar inoculated with test cultures by placing paper disks soaked in supernatants of nocturnal cultures.
  The next day, after incubation of the test crops, the growth pressure zones were measured.
 Proteolytic activity was determined by placing paper disks soaked in supernatant strains of lactic acid bacteria (LAC) strains on the surface of Aikmann agar medium.
 The isolated bacteria were stained according to Gram and studied using a MBI-3 light microscope using a phase contrast.
  The catalase and oxidase activities of the strains have been tested by known methods [1].
 The results and their discussion.
  Preliminary studies isolated 8 Gram-positive, catalase and oxidase-negative lactobacilli and 10 lactococci from 44 cultures isolated from breast milk of Armenian women. 2.0 -6.5%) and 20% bile densities, as well as cultural and fermentative properties.
 The cultural and physiological properties of lactobacilli are presented (Table 1).
 Table 1 Growth and stability of lactobacilli under different environmental conditions 267 As shown in Table 1, growth at 10 0 C is absent in three cultures of lactobacilli, at temperatures of 45 0 C and 50 0 C all cultures grow except 1, 2% NaCl All strains of tested lactobacilli are stable in milk with pH 2 - 9.2 and 20% bile, as well as all lactobacilli also produce ammonia from arginine.
  Only one culture is grown in milk containing 0.1% methylene blue, and two cultures of lactobacilli are sensitive to 6.5% NaCl.
 Table 2 Growth and stability of lactococci under different environmental conditions Table 2 presents the results of the study of lactococcal strains.
  As can be seen from the presented data, all cocci grow at 10 0 C, except for 4, at 45 0 C - all except 1, and at 50 0 C only one coke grows.
  All lactococcal cultures are resistant to 2% NaCl, pH 2 and pH 9.2, 20% bile.
  No 2 cultures grow in 6.5% NaCl medium.
  4 cultures do not produce ammonia from arginine.
  3 lactococcal cultures are grown in milk containing 0.1% methylene blue.
 The resistance of most isolated CBDs to bile, high-density salt, and a wide range of pH is evidence of their viability in the gastrointestinal tract.
 The most important feature of probiotics is their high antibacterial activity.
 The antimicrobial activity of nocturnal cultures of isolated cultures of isolated lactobacilli and lactococcal strains was studied in E. coli O157.
 Pathogenic culture of H7 and C. albicans cultures (Table 3).
 Table 3 Antimicrobial activity of lactobacilli and lactococci Table 3 shows that 5 lactobacilli and 4 coca cultures have high antibacterial activity.
 Their supernatants suppress the growth of E. coli and C. albicans test strains, creating pressure zones of 14-25 mm.
 In order to multiply lactic acid bacteria in milk, amino acids are needed, the source of which is milk casein.
 The proteolytic activity of KTB strains is conditioned by their milk coagulation efficiency.
  The presence of proteolytic activity strains in breast milk is the guarantee of breastfeeding, as well as the subsequent assimilation of infant formula.
  In turn, it will help reduce the allergic effects of cow's milk proteins.
 The transparent bands formed as a result of casein protease 269 lysis around paper disks soaked in overnight cultures of CBD's Aikmann-based's nocturnal cultures indicate their proteolytic activity (Table 4).
 As can be seen from the table, cultures isolated from breast milk have a pronounced proteolytic activity, reaching up to 25 mm.
 Table 4 Proteolytic activity of lactobacilli and lactobacilli Thus, the work performed showed that lactic acid bacteria isolated from breast milk have high antibacterial and proteolytic activity, and their resistance to salt, bile and pH are extremely viable. in the gastrointestinal tract.
 .
