The first cornerstones of the development of the judiciary in Armenia as an independent and autonomous state body were laid by the Declaration of Independence of Armenia, adopted on 23.08.1990, and the Constitution of Armenia adopted on 05.07.1995.
  Newly independent Armenia adopted the path of forming and developing an independent judiciary, which is typical of all real democracies and legal states.
  The principle of independence and autonomy of the judiciary is an indicator of the establishment of the rule of law and a democratic legal-political regime [10, p. 8].
  Moreover, when we say independence of the judiciary, we mean the fact that this branch of government is independent from the other branches of state power.
  The development of the judiciary in Armenia is carried out taking into account international requirements.
  140 JURISDICTIONS The basic principles of the independence of the judiciary were approved by UN General Assembly Resolutions 40/32 of 29.11.1985 and 40/146 of 13.12.1985.
  In particular, they stipulate that the independence of the judiciary is guaranteed by the state (...).
  All state and other institutions are obliged to respect and preserve the independence of the judiciary.
  It has been established that the judicial bodies decide their cases impartially, based on facts, as well as guided by law, without taking into account any direct or indirect threats or motions, by whom and for whatever reasons.
  (...).
  It was also stated that illegal or unauthorized interference in the administration of justice should not take place, as well as court decisions made by courts are not subject to review.
  (...).
  The principle of the independence of the judiciary empowers the judiciary and requires it to conduct fair trials and to ensure the rights of the parties.
  Although the concepts of "principles of judicial independence" and "principles of judicial independence" are not equated, it should be emphasized that they are interconnected and derived from each other.
  In particular, the independence of the court is reflected in a number of procedural provisions, the most important of which are the following: only the court has the power to administer justice, the court independently selects and applies the relevant law without the intervention of any other state body.
  I think that from here it becomes obvious that no matter how different the concepts of "principles of judicial independence" and "principles of judge independence", nevertheless the independence of the judiciary is ensured by the principle of judge independence in all its manifestations.
  Therefore, although this paper is devoted to the principle of judicial independence, based on the above argument that the principles of "independence of the judiciary" and "independence of the judiciary" cannot in fact exist separately, the principle of independence of the judiciary is also addressed.
 Thus, the principle of the independence of the judge, as a principle of the administration of justice, first of all means that the judge makes a judicial act, excluding the interference of any external, including state, local government bodies [11, p. 44].
  The mentioned principle is a fundamental, constitutional principle, and has been enshrined in both the domestic and international legislative systems of the Republic of Armenia.
 The principle of judicial independence is enshrined in international instruments that declare and guarantee the protection of human rights.
  In particular, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (10.12.1948) [Article 1, 10], the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (16.12.1966) [Article 2, 14], "Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms" European Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women [Article 14, Article 6], Ministerial Recommendation (94) 12 on Judicial Independence, Effectiveness and Role of Ministers, Opinion 1 of the European Judicial Advisory Council (JCC), European Charter on the Status of Judges (adopted in July 1998) ), In the report of the Venice Commission on Judicial Appointments (CDLAD (2007) 028) (Strasbourg, 16.03.2010).
 The importance of this principle for the justice system is due to the fact that only an impartial independent judge can substantiate his judicial act with the provisions of the relevant law, guided by the principles of justice (in this sense, the independence of the judge is the principle of "guaranteeing" justice).
  The restoration of justice is the ultimate goal of justice, the realization of which is impossible without the independence of judges [12, p. 30].
  This principle can be viewed in both narrow and broad senses.
  Moreover, in a broad sense, it includes the independence of both the judge and the court and the judiciary.
 142 JURISDICTION Effective administration of justice is impossible without independent judges.
  Only independent judges can directly ensure the protection of citizens' rights and freedoms [4, p. 87].
  Moreover, the independence of a judge is conditioned by a number of factors, which consist of both institutional elements (for example, appointing a highly qualified lawyer to the position of a judge, providing an appropriate environment for the judge to work without external influences, etc.) and personal and professional qualities.
 At the same time, the judge is independent when the issuance of a judicial act guarantees the absence of any external influences and pressures on the latter, as a result of which the role and significance of the court as a state body performing comprehensive and effective protection of violated rights is ensured.
 It is noteworthy that in order to implement this idea, in April 2000, at the initiative of the UN Center, a proposal was made to the judges to regulate their system.
  To this end, a commission of judges from Asia, Africa, and the Pacific, originally from nine countries, formed a commission to develop the principles of judicial conduct, later called the Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct.
  Later, representatives of 75 countries took part in the process of developing and discussing the Bangalore Principles.
  As a result, in November 2002, the six Bangalore Principles were adopted in The Hague (headquarters of the International Court of Justice): independence, objectivity, honesty and non-corruption, compliance with ethics, equality, judicial experience and diligence.
 It is obvious from the above that the Bangalorean Principles also include the principle of the independence of the judiciary, according to which the independence of the judiciary is a precondition for the rule of law and is the main guarantee for the settlement of the case in court.
  Thus, the judge is obliged to protect and implement the principle of independence of the judiciary with its individual and collective aspects.
  In such conditions, the question arises: independence from what, from the authorities, both executive and legislative, from the media, from public opinion?
  It is clear that in all cases independence is not the prerogative of judges, it is the main guarantee of a legal and fair settlement of the case.
 Point 1 of the "Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary" adopted by the UN General Assembly on 06.09.1985 stipulates that "The independence of the judiciary is guaranteed by the state and enshrined in the constitution or laws of the country.
  All state and other institutions are obliged to respect and preserve the independence of the judiciary. ”
  The principle of independence of judges is also enshrined in Article 164, Part 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, which stipulates that "a judge is independent, impartial and acts only in accordance with the Constitution and laws."
  It is obvious that the implementation of justice by an independent and impartial judge requires guarantees, from which the special status of a judge stands out. the irreplaceability of the judge during the examination of the case, the immunity, as well as the relevant legislative "support".
  In particular, according to Part 2 of Article 164 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, "A judge may not be held liable for an opinion expressed or a judicial act rendered while administering justice, except when there are features of a crime or a disciplinary violation."
  Moreover, the independence of the judiciary is not an end in itself.
  It is not a personal advantage of a judge, but is conditioned by the need for judges to act as guarantors of human rights and freedoms [6, p. 2].
  Article 18 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation provides for such a regulation, by which the legislator clarified that the 144 JURISDICTION of a judge is not a personal privilege, but a means intended to ensure the real protection of citizens' rights and freedoms through justice.
 Thus, in essence, the constitutional status of a judge is a guarantee of the right of a person to an independent, fair, impartial and impartial tribunal, and as such is subject to constitutional protection. [17]
  At the same time, according to the Magna Carta (Basic Principles) of Judges, adopted by the European Judicial Advisory Council, the independence of the judiciary is ensured by factors such as the functioning of the courts, the recruitment and appointment of judges before retirement, immutability, promotion and retraining. , discipline, remuneration for the position and funding of the system [3, p. 4].
 Thus, the independence of a judge in the Republic of Armenia is ensured by the provisions of the legal norms enshrined in Articles 162 and 164 of the RA Constitution, as well as in Chapter 11 of the RA Constitutional Law "Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia" ("Guarantees of Judge's Activity").
  In particular, the constitutional level stipulates that: 1. any interference with the administration of justice is prohibited, 2. the judge is inviolable, 3. the judge is irreplaceable, 4. the judge may not be subject to justice and as a court, other powers defined by law deriving from his / her status for an opinion expressed or a judicial act rendered while exercising rights (except for cases containing a crime or features of a disciplinary violation).
 Judicial independence as an imperative norm-principle should be considered in the context of "an independent and impartial tribunal established by law" established by the Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of November 4, 1950 [Article 6, 1- in part].
  According to the case law of the European Court of Human Rights (Strasbourg Court), the court is considered independent if the following are ensured: 1. Practical independence of the court from the legislative and executive bodies and parties, 2. Guarantees of protection of judges from external pressure, 3. External independence of the judiciary the presence of manifestations, 4. the order of appointment of judges, their term of office, as well as their immutability during their tenure.
 From the point of view of the Strasbourg court, the level of independence of a judge is assessed by the following criteria: 1. the judge did not have a personal conviction (subjective approach) on the subject of the case beforehand, 2. there were sufficient guarantees (objective approach) to exclude reasonable doubts.
 They are also guided by the mentioned criteria in the domestic legislations of a number of countries and, as mentioned, in the RA legislative system.
  More important is the fact that the independence of the judiciary is determined by the independence of the judiciary over other branches of government, and is a consequence of the application of the principle of separation of branches of government (usually, it has a constitutional basis).
  The independence of the branches of state power in the Republic of Armenia is guaranteed by Article 4 of the Constitution.
 In particular, the mentioned article states that "State power is exercised in accordance with the Constitution and laws, based on its division and balance of legislative, executive and judicial powers."
  That is, Article 4 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia defines the principle of separation and balance of powers, which assumes that the three branches of state power - legislative, executive and judicial - must be in an independent and autonomous state.
  The only goal of such a system of state power is to prevent the exercise of power by one body and its concentration in one body, the abuse of state power.
  Although these laws set and regulate the standards of independence of the judiciary, they are the basis for the need to protect judges from external influences, as well as to guarantee their internal independence.
  That is, just as the constitutional level guarantees the independence of the judiciary from the branches of the executive and the legislature by prohibiting any interference by those bodies in the activities of the judiciary, so the legislature must create an appropriate environment to exclude judges from any executive, legislative or other state body.
  Therefore, this measure of the independence of the judge is a logical consequence of the principle of separation of powers [4, p. 88].
  Referring to the provision of external independence of judges, the European Judicial Advisory Council singled out four main elements in its No. 1 opinion. a. Immunity of a judge, b. incompatibility requirements, c. impartiality, d. the final and binding nature of judicial acts.
 No less important is the internal independence of the judge, which was specifically addressed in Recommendation No. 12 of the Committee of Ministers (2010), according to which judges are not inferior to the President of the Court or to the judges and the President of a higher instance [9, point 22].
  At the same time, each judge makes a judicial act on behalf of the state and is accountable exclusively to the law, that is, judges are subject only to the law.
 As for the issue of guaranteeing the independence of judges, the legislator has placed that obligation on the Supreme Judicial Council, which according to Article 173 of the RA Constitution is an independent state body and guarantees the independence of courts and judges.
 Therefore, the Supreme Judicial Council, through its legal practice, is obliged to take appropriate measures to ensure the independence of judges as much as possible.
 According to Recommendation No. 12 of the Committee of Ministers (2010), the Supreme Judicial Council, which not only guarantees the independence of judges but is also a competent body for the appointment and promotion of judges, is important to be independent of the executive and legislature.
  According to the Advisory Board of the European Judges No. 10, the Supreme Judicial Council may be composed exclusively of judges or may have a mixed composition.
  In both cases there is a need to avoid mercenary, self-defense and alternative appointments [paragraph 16].
  It is noteworthy that the Venice Commission also stated in its 2010 report that the Supreme Judicial Council should have a mixed composition, emphasizing that the majority of council members should be appointed from among the judges, emphasizing that the latter should be elected by their equals. [8] .
 In the light of the above, referring to the issue of ensuring and guaranteeing the independence of judges in Armenia, I find that certain provisions of Chapter 7 of the RA Constitution, related to the election of members of the Supreme Judicial Council, judges of the Constitutional and Cassation Courts, are a cause for concern.
  In particular, according to Article 166, Part 1 of the RA Constitution, the judges of the Constitutional Court are elected by the RA National Assembly, according to Part 3 of the same Article, the judges of the Cassation Court are appointed by the President of the Republic upon the proposal of the National Assembly, according to Part 5, the President of the Cassation Court. Elects the National Assembly, and according to Article 174, Part 1, 148 JURISDICTIONS vote: The Supreme Judicial Council consists of ten members, according to Part 2 of the same Article, the five members of the Supreme Judicial Council are elected by the General Assembly of Judges; The National Assembly elects the five members of the Supreme Judicial Council.
 In fact, although on the one hand the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia directly prohibits the interference of the legislative and executive bodies in the activities of the judiciary, nevertheless, the legislature has a significant role in the formation of the judiciary.
  Therefore, the questions of whether other branches of government, and in particular the legislature, do not interfere in the formation and activity of the judiciary in such a way are worrying.
  Is the principle of "independence" of the judiciary fully ensured in the Republic of Armenia and, finally, in such conditions, should we still confidently assert that the principle of separation of powers operates in the Republic of Armenia and the judiciary is completely independent and not subject to any, even slight pressure? by other branches.
  The mentioned questions give rise to reflections in the sense that in such conditions to claim that other branches of government do not try to interfere in the activities of the judiciary in any way, is nevertheless unfounded.
 Therefore, based on the position of the Venice Commission, the opinion of the Advisory Council of European Judges, I find that the above provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, however, do not fully ensure the independence of the judiciary (and in this case the same as judges) from other branches of government.
  Therefore, taking into account the principle of separation of powers in the Republic of Armenia, it is necessary to take measures to ensure that both the executive and the legislature do not interfere in any way with the activities of the judiciary, as well as to ensure a significant majority of judges in the Supreme Judicial Council.
  Otherwise, I consider that the complete guarantee of the principles of both the judiciary and the independence of the judge is a danger.
 Thus, referring to the above-mentioned legal problem, I think that its solution, in general, should be sought in the judiciary.
  In particular, the legal chain of the RA President-Constitutional Court-Supreme Judicial Council-General Assembly of Judges should be made a subject of comprehensive study.
  Moreover, the central role in the mentioned chain should be assigned to the Constitutional Court.
  The mentioned is substantiated by the fact that the Constitutional Court, as in a number of European countries, has the status of a sui generis court in the Republic of Armenia.
  Although it is considered to be an integral part of the judiciary, it is not, in fact and in its status, part of the overall judiciary.
  That is, the Constitutional Court is an independent state body separated from the general jurisdiction of the first instance, as well as from specialized courts, appellate and cassation instances, which, although considered a court by its structure, but its powers do not coincide in any way with the powers of RA courts.
  On the other hand, the Constitutional Court administers constitutional justice, ensuring the supremacy of the Constitution [Article 15, 167, Part 1].
  In such conditions, I think that the Constitutional Court is the body that can perform the functions assigned by the legislator to the RA National Assembly in connection with the election of the President of the Court of Cassation and non-judge-legal members of the Supreme Judicial Council.
 Moreover, in order to avoid abusing the powers of the Constitutional Court, the Constitutional Court may be authorized not to elect, but to propose the candidacy of the President of the Court of Cassation and non-judicial members of the Supreme Judicial Council for the appointment of the President of the Republic.
 JURISDICTION Regarding the election of judges of the Court of Cassation, it is proposed to reserve this power to the General Assembly of Judges, which is a self-governing body of judges [Article 16, 74, part 1], whose status, activities and scope of powers are defined in Judicial Code ”by the RA Constitutional Law.
 Referring to the election of judges of the Constitutional Court, then studying the structure of the constitutional courts of some countries, including the Republic of Bulgaria, the Republic of Serbia, the Kingdom of Spain, it becomes clear that some members or judges of the Constitutional Court are elected by the National Assembly. the president of the country.
  In another European country, Greece, the members of the Constitutional Court are elected by the judges of the highest courts of the country.
 Considering that this work raises the issue that the legislature interferes in the functioning of the judiciary in any case, I think that especially in the election of judges of the Constitutional Court, the European experience should be borrowed, adapting it to our legislative system.
  Accordingly, I think that the judges of the Constitutional Court, who have previously worked as judges before assuming the post, should be elected by the General Assembly of Judges from among the judges of the Supreme Court of Appeal or the Court of Cassation, according to their professional and work experience. , who have not had the work experience of a judge before being appointed to that position, can be elected by the President of the Republic of Armenia upon the proposal of the Supreme Judicial Council.
 Thus, although the solution to the problem raised by this paper is time consuming, requires some action, even a legislative change, I still believe that the above legal mechanism and means will enable the creation of a more flexible system, and that the most important thing is to be free. They will protect the judiciary from the interference of any other branch of government.
 .
