2016 As a result of the April hostilities, a qualitatively new military-political reality was created in our region.
  Three years after the four-day battles in April, it is appropriate to address this topic from the standpoint of political science and military psychology, drawing some conclusions.
 First of all, in 2016 The April hostilities should be considered as one of the long-term, long cycles of military conflict with Azerbaijan.
  Accordingly, what happened is not the last military conflict [1, pp. 27-37; 2].
 In April 2016, the enemy played a number of tactical tricks to break through our defense, which are already refined in the post-April period during regular military exercises.
  Naturally, the enemy will learn from its failure in preparation for the next combat operations.
  At the same time, willy-nilly, the enemy revealed its tactical ideas during the April battles.
  According to that, I think I am 259 PSYCHOLOGY, it would be unforgivable short-sightedness to exclude the new aggression of the enemy.
  Similarly, the likelihood of hostilities using limited forces and means should be considered high.
 Let us especially emphasize that the problems set before the enemy's attack groups in April were not solved.
  Moreover, in the post-April period, Baku is making consistent efforts to restore the combat capabilities of the armed forces.
  Regular military exercises are a vivid proof of that.
  Therefore, one should not give in to self-deception, the desired should not be perceived as reality. A reliable and lasting peace, unfortunately, is impossible in the foreseeable future.
 In order not to come suddenly, to mobilize quickly and to stop the enemy within our borders with a strong response, forcing him to make peace outside our borders, we must be psychologically ready for a new aggression.
  2016 In April, we witnessed that the guarantee of successful resistance to aggression is the readiness of the society.
 Along with all this, I also think that the April battles had a sobering effect on the Aliyev clan.
  No matter how much the outcome of the battles in Baku is presented as a victory, nevertheless I suppose that the belief in a real victory against us in Aliyev's narrow circle was shaken.
 Of course, President Aliyev did not give up his aggressive aspirations.
  Apparently, a conclusion was made in Baku that it is necessary to better prepare for the next blow.
  Nevertheless, I am sure that the outcome of the April battles left an overwhelming impression on President Aliyev and his entourage, particularly deepening the fear of failure in the future.
  It is obvious that in the future it will be much more difficult for President Aliyev to order the resumption of hostilities, the skepticism towards high-ranking military officials will deepen, in particular, the suspicion that the latter distorted the reality and presented it as a reality 260 PSYCHOLOGY.
  It can also be said with certainty that such a course and outcome of hostilities was unexpected for Baku.
  It is appropriate to detail here.
 I think at the time of unleashing aggression, President Aliyev did not have an adequate idea of ​​the combat effectiveness of the Artsakh Defense Army and its own armed forces.
  Baku simply would not have unleashed hostilities if the high-ranking military had presented its commander-in-chief with a realistic picture of the balance of power, and most importantly, if President Aliyev had at least roughly imagined the real outcome of the hostilities.
  Apparently, the decision of aggression in Baku was made on the basis of reports with the logic of presenting the desired as a reality.
  In authoritarian systems, this is often the case when, out of fear of the leader's anger, what is desirable for him is reported.
 There is every reason to believe that in the Azerbaijani Armed Forces, information superior to reality is presented to the superior command of the corps, which is finally distorted and refined, being satisfied with the desired accents when presented to the Commander-in-Chief.
  According to that, President Aliyev is presented with a desirable image, which is far from reality.
 No matter how much we say that military life in Baku is worthless, I still do not think that for such a modest result, President Aliyev would be ready to sacrifice his most trained personnel for a few bases.
  It is a fact that much greater results were expected in Baku.
  In this sense, the capture of several of our strongholds literally saved the face of President Aliyev.
 And how to qualify the outcome of the April battles?
  Of course, it would not be right to describe it as a complete victory.
  The outcome of the hostilities was successful for us, and in general, with some reservations, it can be described as a victory.
  What could have been done in three and a half days was done.
  Since 261 PSYCHOLOGY, it must be taken into account that a "great war" was prevented in a very short period of time.
  To put it figuratively, the enemy captured several strongholds but lost the battle, and we lost several strongholds but won the battle.
 Yes, the loss of those few strongholds was painful for us.
  That reaction of the society should be considered completely healthy.
  Of course, in the conditions of the threat of a "great war", the more our positions are pushed forward, the shorter it will be possible to break the momentum of the enemy's attack.
  However, in this case, it is fundamentally important to emphasize that by capturing several bases of the first echelon of defense, the Azerbaijani side did not gain a decisive advantage over us.
  The integrity of the defense system has been preserved, the outline of the state border has changed slightly.
  Of course, all this does not mean that we no longer need those bases.
 I should mention that this loss can be restored in principle, and I am more than sure that our people will not hesitate to "restore justice" in case of an opportunity.
  And the opponent will give such an opportunity.
 Moreover, in this case, it is fundamentally important to solve the military problem without losses or with minimal losses.
 He described the April battles as quite appropriate as the second Azerbaijani aggression against Artsakh. aggression, which failed again.
  Unleashing the second aggression against Artsakh, and again failing, official Baku legitimized the current borders of Artsakh.
  Let us especially emphasize that the current borders of Artsakh were drawn as a result of repelling two Azerbaijani aggressions.
 In this context, of course, the Madrid principles are outdated now, and of course they must be overturned sooner or later.
  The borders of the states are drawn, then they get international recognition by the law of force.
  In April, the state border of Artsakh was re-established by that very law.
 We should especially emphasize that the recognition of the legal entity of Artsakh is not worth a penny without the current borders [3, pages 241-257].
  Against the background of being steadfast Turkish-Azerbaijani aggressive aspirations 262 PSYCHOLOGY, the guarantee of the viability of the Armenian statehood is the recognition of the legal entity of Artsakh within the current borders, which is a difficult, time-consuming, but achievable goal [5].
 In April 2016, an important step was taken in that direction.
  According to that, the Artsakh Defense Army repulsed the Azerbaijani aggression for the second time and re-established the borders of Artsakh in 2016. It is the main military-political result of the April hostilities.
  Two years ago, the Armenians of Artsakh, with the help of all Armenians, earned their right to live with dignity on a fragment of their historical homeland within the present borders, forcing the world to take into account the Armenianness of Artsakh.
 Another fundamental question. After the April hostilities, President Aliyev lost the main tool of his blackmail, the playing card of intimidating the military with a rapidly victorious war.
  In April, it became clear that the fighting efficiency of the Azerbaijani army was, to put it mildly, greatly exaggerated.
 By the way, the opinion that the military potential of Azerbaijan is not enough to occupy the territory of Artsakh is also prevalent among the Russian and Russian-speaking expert community (J. Kedmi, M. Khodoryonok and others) [7, 8].
  While not underestimating the enemy at all, it is clear that President Aliyev can no longer be convincing as a force to be reckoned with.
  This is probably the next military-political result of the failure of the Azerbaijani aggression in April.
 Another consideration.
  The fact that the enemy was defeated again was already clear on April 4, when the state border in the north-eastern direction was partially restored, a large-scale attack in the direction of Akna was prevented, and the enemy's attack resource was almost exhausted.
  And this is in the case when the enemy had thrown his most trained personnel into battle.
  After April 4, the enemy had a problem to keep some of our strongholds at all costs.
  Accordingly, on April 4, 5, without exaggeration, every hour of hostilities 263 PSYCHOLOGY made the consequences of defeat worse and heavier.
  It was the realization of that circumstance that made the opponent ask for a ceasefire.
  The reality is that on April 5, at the time of the signing of the ceasefire, the Azeri offensive groups had already lost their combat effectiveness and were carrying out purely defensive tasks.
  Therefore, the view is unequivocal that the signing of the ceasefire on April 5 should be considered as a big compromise made by the Armenian side.
 Thus, after the failure of the second Azerbaijani aggression, the positions of the Armenian side in the negotiation process have significantly strengthened.
  Now the monopoly of acting from the positions of power belongs to the Armenian side.
 .
