The system of state power is the totality of the legislative field, the system of state governance and the state service, due to which the main functions of the state are carried out and the problems facing the country are solved.
 Public administration is aimed at strengthening the country's economy, strengthening independent statehood, raising the living standards of the population, and ensuring the sustainable development of public relations.
  It should be considered both as a system, which includes public administration bodies and the functions performed by them, methods and means of application, interrelationships between objects and objects, and as a process, as it is a continuous exercise of government powers, which As a result, changes in social life and phenomena take place.
 The state performs a number of important internal and external functions.
  The main function is to achieve social and political stability, to serve the common good.
  It provides the following internal services: 9 economic, acting as the main coordinator, regulating the economic processes, 9 social, guaranteeing the social security system, social compensations, social guardianship, development of healthcare.
 9 Educational-cultural, acting as the main guarantor of the development of the national culture and science, public education system, 9 Ecological, being responsible for the preservation of the environment in its territory.
 The external functions of the state are aimed at the realization of its interests and goals in the international arena.
  The main ones are ensuring national security, protection of state interests, development of mutually beneficial international cooperation and participation in the solution of common problems.
  In order to carry out these functions, the state needs, first of all, knowledge and application of management functions [1].
 Management functions, in turn, are many and varied.
  According to the content of the management process, the main or general management functions are separated.
  The most important element of any organization is the person.
  People doing the same job always need guidance.
 Any management process ends in control.
  Without control it is impossible to find out whether the set goal has been achieved or not.
  The main or general functions of management reflect the content of a single, concise, complete stage of management.
  The general management functions are periodic.
  The origin of management functions is the result of managerial activities and the division of labor in general.
 In case of simple work, the application of general management is sufficient.
  However, along with the increase in production volumes, there is a specialization of managerial activities - management functions.
  According to the general theory of management, the results of the study of management functions were presented for the first time by the French scientist A. File and separate them in the following order (see Figure 1.): y forecast, y planning, y organization, y system, y control.
 Figure 1. Period of general management functions [2].
 130 MANAGEMENT According to the American School of Theory, the following classification of management functions is common: planning, organization, motivation, and oversight.
 According to the Russian school, the following functions are distinguished: targeting, analysis, forecasting, planning, organizing, coordinating, exploiting, controlling and supervising, communication, decision-making.
 In the variety of views and approaches, let us emphasize that: 3⁄4 it is necessary to differentiate the functions of management, governing bodies and management staff, 3⁄4 management functions are primary, basic and fundamental for defining the functions of governing bodies and management staff, 3⁄4 all management functions are interconnected, coordinated and reflect management The internal logic of the formation of the system, therefore, the management system is a system where the management functions are performed.
 Generalizing and privatizing, we can say that the process of public administration is a conscious and purposeful activity related to the implementation of state powers and legal norms by public authorities, as a result of which the change of social events, phenomena and situations in the society takes place directly.
 In other words, certain actions are taken in the process of public administration, leading to the desired dynamics of administrative results.
  In particular, the adopted laws and the policy adopted by the public authorities must be implemented.
  As an independent form of state activity, state management is characterized by features that stem from the exercise of its commanding and executive powers.
  The content of public administration consists of a combination of functions 131 GOVERNANCE, which are relatively independent elements of state activity, which are carried out on the basis of law or other legal act with the help of a system of special bodies and its own methods.
 In an attempt to rectify the situation, the Armenian authorities are focusing on the efficiency of the state apparatus and the improvement of the quality of services provided to the population.
  For that purpose, in 2008 The Public Administration Reform Commission of the Republic of Armenia was established and continues its activity today. The "Concept of Structural Reforms of the Public Administration System of the Republic of Armenia" has been developed and large-scale work is being carried out to implement structural and functional reforms in accordance with the conceptual provisions developed in the RA Ministries and other government departments.
 In such conditions of globalization, the development and application of a new concept is also relevant for the Republic of Armenia, but it requires time and appropriate resources (financial, human, etc.) to conduct the necessary research, to develop new structures.
 It should be noted that the current system of public administration in Armenia does not meet the requirements of the time and needs to be reformed.
  Inefficient state governance of the Republic of Armenia is a consequence of general "diseases" of the government, of which Armenia is characterized by the lack of formal governance ideology, purpose, mechanisms for exchanging available and necessary information between the branches of government, inaccuracies in the executive orders and duplication of functions.
 The public often does not understand the purpose and necessity of decisions made at different levels of government, which is the result of a lack of transparency in the activities of the government and failure to inform the public in advance about the actions to be taken.
 Today in Armenia there is no strategy for the formation of an effective system of public administration, which should be the basis for structural and functional reforms of the public administration system (CMP) and the improvement of public service.
 The SGP structural reform complex should be targeted. 3⁄4 Establishment of a system with clear and conceptually common principles of government, 3⁄4 formation of a unified approach to the organizational structures of governing bodies, 3մանը4 ensuring transparency and interconnected implementation of all functions of governing bodies, 3⁄4 scope of goals, objectives and functions - clear demarcation from each other.
 The following principles should be enshrined in the basis of an effective state management system: a. the supremacy of the right and freedom of the person, b. Democracy - ensuring direct public participation in the formation and organization of state bodies, c. Clear separation of tasks and functions of the branches of government, d. Transparency of activities, e. The professionalism of civil servants, f. The optimal ratio of concentration and decentralization levels, g. The clear structure of the hierarchy of public administration bodies.
 So far, instead of focusing on more strategic issues, only tactical tasks have been implemented, including partial structural changes in governing bodies, budget cuts, which have led to a decline in the quality of public services.
 Studies of the functions performed by the public administration bodies of the Republic of Armenia show that repetitions of both problems and functions are often observed at different levels of government.
  In particular, there are services and inspections in the functions performed by the ministries, which, according to the concept of the reforms of the public administration system of the Republic of Armenia, should be performed by agencies and inspectorates.
 At present, a comprehensive analysis of the separation of functions is being carried out to assess the degree of decentralization of the powers of the executive bodies of the Republic of Armenia and to develop mechanisms for the implementation of functions.
 It is important to look at governance as a complex and unified whole (with all its elements and features).
  In other words, it is not accidental that the biggest difficulty of management is not so much the knowledge of its basic and basic principles and functions, but its application.
 The theory of public administration seeks to identify the objective patterns that exist in state activity in order to formulate proposals based on them, while the subject of the science of administrative law is the current legal norms of those proposals and guarantees.
 We can single out some of the main problems that the theory of public administration deals with today [3].
 The first is the elaboration of strategic issues of public administration, which supposes the formation of the political strategy of the state, the making of political decisions, the elaboration of state programs of state strategic management.
 The second is the organization of public administration at different levels.
  It is the development of the functions of the state apparatus at different levels, the coordination of the public administration as a whole system, the implementation.
 Third, a large group of issues is the recruitment and training of managerial staff.
  The issues of optimal and realistic staffing of state apparatus officials, personnel management issues in state organizations, requirements for the work style and mentality of skilled and professional civil servants, issues related to leadership and bureaucracy are studied here.
 The fourth is the problems related to public administration equipment.
  This group includes the theory of public administration decision-making, the methods of political forecasting, administrative and public administration in crisis and emergency situations, the technologies of relations between the state administration (administration) and the mass media.
 Modern changes in government departments differ from the previous ones in that they are based on the requirements of rationality and economy, and not on the exaggeration of staff and unnecessary expansion of the sphere of activity.
 Heads of state bodies are advised to govern based on external change factors.
  This method allows you to better adapt to the requirements of the environment, to predict the course of events, to predict them and to organize the work accordingly.
  This is the most important method of strategic planning used in the private sector.
  Its use in the state department is difficult due to the fact that the work there is connected with political processes.
 It is difficult to adapt to external pressures of state institutions due to the nature of their structure and problems.
  The goals set for government agencies are usually many and not very clear.
 They can be replaced by others and even completely opposite.
  They also do not have clear criteria for achieving the set goals.
  Success in public administration lies not only in making the right decision, but also in striving for active political support.
 .
