From the very first days of its existence, man has fought for his own security.
  It seems that in the course of several thousand years of existence, recording the progress and achievements that exist, mankind should have solved the problems related to personal immunity.
  However, in the current context, where wars, terrorism, deportations and, ultimately, other acts of aggression are becoming more acute, public security in general and personal security in particular are becoming increasingly relevant, including measures to maintain and strengthen them, including: The problem of improving legal structures.
 In this context, it is not accidental that international legal structures such as "Responsibility to Protect" 1, "Humanitarian Intervention" 2, which, as relatively new institutions of law, derive from state-centered security to people-centered security by the international community. from the essence of the notion formed as a result of active steps to take, such as the obligation of the international community to protect people in the territory of any state from mass violations of their rights.
 See, entry date: 25.10.2017 See, http.
 //opil.ouplaw.com/view/10.1093/law.
 epil / 9780199231690 / law-9780199231690e306, date of entry: 26.10.2017 369 LEGALITY
 And with the amendments of the Republic of Armenia in 2015, the Constitution (hereinafter referred to as the Constitution) directly enshrines the right to physical and mental immunity, which, according to many existing scientific approaches, is accepted as a component of the right to personal immunity.
 Therefore, taking into account the fact that the right to physical and mental immunity is directly enshrined in the Constitution and the imperative to formulate its subjective boundaries, it becomes an inevitable necessity to study the legal and philosophical database of the development of the right to personal immunity during the conscious coexistence of human society.
 Thus, personal immunity has ancient historical roots.
  The idea of ​​personal immunity has been reflected in the work of ancient thinkers.
  Unique interpretations of this right include Aristotle, the greatest philosopher of antiquity, the indivisible link between the state, law, and individual liberty; On the need not to harm others and to make people's lives safer, Ulpianus' provisions on the natural right to liberty3.
 See, Nersesyan VS Philosophy rights. - M., 1997, p. 418, 421, 425, 428-429, 433.
 370 JURISDICTION Interpretation of the idea of ​​individual rights and freedoms in general and the interpretation of the emerging concept of personal immunity in particular, although appealing to natural human rights, nevertheless was largely classy (elite) and therefore limited in nature.
  The development of the idea of ​​personal immunity in the Middle Ages was objectively conditioned by the overthrow of slavery and the formation of feudal social relations, which inevitably led to the absence of completely disenfranchised people.
  However, the property-representative nature of the public relations of the feudal society prevented the equal distribution of the right to personal immunity to all categories (classes) of citizens.
 Defining the discussed stage of development of public relations, A.Y. Gurevich mentioned. "Just as freedom did not preclude dependence, so dependence did not mean the absence of any right."
 Referring to the above phenomenon, we can not fail to cite the views of the famous medieval philosopher, coordinator of orthodox scholasticism Tovma Aquinas, in particular the provisions of a number of his works on the common good, physical and moral nature of man, which must comply with state law5.
 The idea of ​​personal immunity, which was clearly formulated for the first time, is attributed to the period under discussion.
  It is considered accepted that the right to personal immunity was first legally enshrined in the Grand Charter of Freedoms (Latin: "Magna Carta Libertatum") signed on June 15, 1215 by King John I of England.
 The Great Charter of Freedoms World History See Gurevich A.J. Categories of medieval culture.- M., 1972, p. 176.
 See, Nersesyan VS Philosophy rights. - M., 1997, p. 440-441.
 371 JURISDICTION is one of the unique documents that has undergone a great historical evolution, having its very specific legal, political, economic impact on society in different eras.
 Article 39 of the mentioned charter stated: "No free person may be arrested, imprisoned, deprived of his property, declared illegal or deported, or deprived of his property in any other way, and we shall not prosecute him except by the law of his equals and the law of the land."
  The king was forbidden to interfere in the internal affairs of the great feudal lords without advice, to collect taxes, to arrest, to deport them, and so on.
  A body was set up to oversee the implementation of the Charter, consisting of 25 barons.
  But anyway, Khartia did not give anything to the peasantry.
  6.
 The next legal document is the petition "On Rights" adopted by Edward Kok in 1628, which is considered by many experts as the second Charter, and it already spoke about the freedom of subjects.
 In particular, if Article 39 of the Charter enshrined the rights of "free people (nobles)", then it mentions "freedom of subjects".
  Of course, the concept of "subject" already included wider sections of society, such as slaves, peasants, and so on.
 The idea of ​​personal immunity becomes more relevant, theoretical and practical in the period of bourgeois revolutions, when the bourgeoisie, under the slogan of freedom, equality and security, seeks to win over the masses.
 As Hugo Hrozios mentioned: "The state is an absolute union of free people, signed for the protection of the right and the common good.
 »7.
 Another famous thinker, English pedagogue and philosopher. See, http.
 //boon.am/magna-carta/, date of entry: 17.10.2017 See, Г.ций Г. O makes war and peace. - M., 1956, p. 74.
 372 JURISDICTION John Locke linked personal immunity to the provision of values ​​such as life, liberty and health.
 In his opinion. “Since all humans are created by one almighty and infinitely wise Creator, they are the servants of one Lord, therefore they are equal and independent.
  Each of us has a responsibility to protect ourselves, and when our own lives are not in danger, as much as possible, to other people.
 It is also obligatory, except to administer justice to the perpetrator, not to deprive of life, not to encroach on it, and equally not to act in a manner that adversely affects the life, health, liberty or property of another. ”8
 William Blaxton, distinguishing between the rights of personal security and personal liberty, placed first the legal control of the individual over his life, body, health and authority, and the second the possibility of movement, the restriction of which was permissible only in cases provided by law.
 Charles Montesquieu considered personal security to be inextricably linked to political freedom, criminal and judicial guarantees, arguing that freedom required judicial procedures, rules of procedure and forms that would serve the purpose of enforcing the law10.
 Among the inalienable (natural) human rights, Thomas Hosb singled out the right of human resistance to those who would violate human life or health, wish to impose illegal restrictions or imprison a person11.
 See Lokk D. Selected philosophical productions 1 In order. Makarovekogo A.A. See Blackstone W. Commentaries on the Laws of England. - Philadelphia, 1859, p. 129-134.
 See, Montesquieu Sh. Selected products. - M., 1955, p. 317-318.
 See Gobbs T. Leviathan, or matter, form and authority of the Church of the SubGenius and 373 JURISDICTION Gaining a deep theoretical understanding, the right to personal immunity is enshrined in the British Habeas Corp Act of 1679 12, 1789 of the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen US Bill of Rights (Amendments 4, 5).
 In those historical documents, personal immunity was considered as a set of guarantees of protection from illegal detentions (including arrests) and judicial arbitrariness, that is, first of all, it was considered from the criminal procedural aspect.
 Thus, the Habeas Corpus Act included a number of legal safeguards for the protection of personal immunity, defining concepts such as due process and the principle of the presumption of innocence.
  Thereafter, any person who considered himself to be unlawfully arrested or detained could apply to the court in person or through his representatives, requesting an order from the Habeas Corps.
  If such a court order was issued, the officials under whose jurisdiction the person appealed to the court had to bring that person to court, and if the detention was found to be unfounded, the detainee was released and he could no longer be re-arrested on the same charges.
 The 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen enshrined the immunity of a person under Article 7, which stated that a citizen could not be charged, arrested or imprisoned except in cases provided by law and subject to the strict procedures prescribed by law.
 The Habeas corpus act (derived from the Latin name "Habeas corpus ad subjiciendum") became known as the Habeas corpus ad subjiciendum in 1679. The constitutional law passed by the English Parliament in 1679, "The best guarantee of civil liberty and safeguard"
 See History of State and Rights 1. Under ed. MI. Sizikova. - M., 1997, p. 275.
 374 JURISDICTION Anyone who requests or gives an illegal order or carries out or orders its execution is subject to punishment14.
 Finally, in the 4th amendment of the American Bill of Rights of 1791, the term "immunity of person" was already directly used. "The right of the people to the inviolability of the person, the apartment, the documents and the property shall not be violated by unjustified searches and arrests, and no sanction shall be imposed except by sufficient grounds, by an affidavit or by an affidavit and by the place of arrest and detention or confiscation." with a detailed description of the subjects.
 »15.
 Inalienable human rights (first generation rights), including the right to personal immunity, were seen as so-called negative freedom rights, obliging the state to refrain from interfering in the areas governed by those rights16.
 Prominent Russian lawyer B.A. Kistyakovsky classified the immunity of a person as a group of rights that is commonly referred to as "freedom from the state" 17.
 Developing this approach, B.P. Vysheslavtsev considered that the right to inviolability of a person means "the right to demand that a citizen not interfere with state power until he has committed any illegal act" 18.
 It should be noted that the majority of both Russian and European scholars proceeded from the concept that personal immunity is freedom from unlawful coercion by the state.
 In terms of content, this idea is a component of the principle of the rule of law and the rule of law, which See, Anthology of Peaceful Thought. T. III. - M., 1999, p. 244.
 See Anthology of Peaceful Thoughts. T. III. - M., 1999, p. 243.
 See General theory of straight man. In order. E.A. Lukashevoy. - M., 1996, p. 21.
 See Kistyakovsky B.A. Social sciences and law. - M., 1916, p. 561.
 See, Вышеславцев Б.П. Guarantees straight citizen. - M., 1917, p. 7.
 375 JURISDICTION has found its modern reflection as in the 2005 amendments to the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia (the state is limited to the basic human and civil rights and freedoms as a directly applicable right.
 ) as well as the 2015 amendments to the Constitution (Public authority is limited to the basic human and civil rights and freedoms as a directly applicable right.
 ).
 Against the background of the above-mentioned approaches to personal immunity, P.I. Lublinski's position, which raised not only the issue of protection from state coercion, but also the issue of protection against coercion by other citizens.
  In his opinion, a person's immunity. "It is a right that is based on the realization of the possibility to act in accordance with one's own convictions within the framework defined by law, at the same time not being afraid of retaliatory actions of a state nature or by individuals.
 »19.
  In fact, Lublinski was one of the first to consider the realization of this right not only the responsibility of the state, but also of the citizens.
  It can be deduced from the above that this right has three conventional platforms of action: person-state, person-society and person-person relations.
 It is noteworthy that even in Russia, which, unlike European countries, does not have developed traditions of democracy and human rights, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the ideas of constitutional regulation of fundamental human rights, including the right to personal immunity, were actively developed. .
 An example of this is the draft law of the Russian Empire introduced in 1905.
 The bill provided for freedom of occupation and choice of residence, including the right to leave the country and to return to the country.
  One of the merits of the project was See, Люблинский П.И. Inviolability of persons. - Pg., 1917, p. 6-7.
 376 JURISDICTION also that it enshrined the freedom of oral and written expression of one's own thoughts20.
 Thus, by saying the right to personal immunity, it was accepted to understand a set of rights.
  From this point of view, the establishment and development of the right to personal immunity was decisively influenced by the natural-legal concept, which was called to put a barrier between freedom and state sovereignty, which hindered the development of individual autonomy.
 However, it should be noted that the natural-legal concept was not the only one in the establishment and development of human rights.
  This concept has been and continues to be opposed by the concept of positive law (positivist concept) with its approaches to the nature of human rights, the relationship between man and the state.
  According to this concept, human rights, their scope and content are determined by the state, which "dedicates" them to man21.
 It is from such opposing positions that the content of human rights and freedoms, the relations between man and the state, including in the field of personal immunity, have been and are being assessed.
 It is noteworthy that the marked contradiction of approaches exists not only at the theoretical level, but also at the legal-legislative level.
  In particular, the constitutions of France, Italy, Spain, Russia and the United States are largely expressed in the natural-legal concept, while the constitutions of Austria and Germany are mostly based on positivist approaches.
 In connection with the two concepts, G.V. Maltsev and NL Granet's views, which considered that each of the lawsuits reflects the actual state of the "cases", but "suffers" from one-sidedness.
 The natural-legal concept, insisting on a person being born, See, Constitutional Government, Sb. Statue, Ed. 2-e.- Pg., 1905, p. 527-574.
 See General theory of law. - N. Novgorod, 1993, p. 11-21.
 377 The inalienability of rights in JURISDICTION inevitably conflicts with the current realities of public life.
 The positivist concept reduces the role of man and affirms the supremacy of the state over the person.
 According to Maltsev and Granet, the truth, as always, is in the middle. The natural-legal concept obliges the state government to recognize and ensure by birth constitutional and other legal rights, such as the right to life, the right to a dignified and adequate standard of living, freedom, personal immunity and a number of other rights, while there are other rights. , which get real life only through state power, with the adoption of relevant laws regulating social, spiritual and material rights, such as the right to work, active and passive suffrage, etc. 22.
 Summarizing the topic of legal concepts regarding the right to personal immunity, it should be noted that both concepts have left their mark on the establishment and development of the right under discussion. The first is mostly in the field of person-society and person-person relations, the second is mostly in the field of person-state relations.
 Regarding the current stage of development of the right to privacy, it should be noted that the rate of development of human rights increased unprecedentedly, especially after the end of World War II.
 Evidence of this is the international legal documents, which to one extent or another enshrine certain provisions on personal immunity.
  It is noteworthy that some of these documents, in terms of commitments made to member states, act as a constitutional minimum.
  That is, in this case in the field of human rights can not be provided by the Constitution. See, Maltsev G. В. Rights and freedoms of man // Theory of gossip and rights. - M., 1995, p. 217, Granet N.L. Wisdom and personality. - M., 1997, p. 8.
 378 JURISDICTION less guarantees than provided for, for example, by the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the Convention).
 The Convention directly enshrines the right to personal immunity, in particular in accordance with Article 5: "Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person.
  (...) ».
  However, among the international documents, the Convention is not the only one that has a direct wording on personal immunity.
  The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (December 16, 1966) contains a similar provision, according to the first part of Article 9 of which: "Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person.
  (...) ».
 It should be noted that the Republic of Armenia, as a legal state, as well as a party to a number of treaties, also has separate legal regulations on personal immunity.
  Referring to the regulations at the constitutional level, it should be noted that Article 16 of the former Constitution stipulated that everyone has the right to personal freedom and inviolability.
  As we can see from the wording of the text, in contrast to the above-mentioned international legal documents, in the discussed wording of the former constitution, the word "personal" is not next to the word "immunity", but the word "freedom".
  This caused controversy as to whether in the case of such a wording immunity meant personal immunity, which is also accompanied by mental immunity, or merely physical immunity.
 Such disputes, in a sense, put an end to the regulation provided for in Article 25 of the current Constitution, according to which everyone has the right to physical and mental immunity.
 Thus, summarizing the results of the research, perhaps the following conclusions can be distinguished: 379 JURISDICTION 1. First of all, it should be noted that personal immunity as an idea has a much longer history of development than as a right.
  The historical process of development of the idea of ​​personal immunity, as we have shown, begins from the days of human existence and extends to our days, while the historical beginning of the development of the right to personal immunity can be considered the first half of the 13th century.
 2. In the conditions of slavery, slaves were not considered to be the addressees of the right in question, as they were regarded as a "talking tool" and were generally deprived of any rights.
  Meanwhile, during the period of the overthrow of these classes and the establishment of the feudal system, the subjects also acquired a number of rights that are elements of personal immunity, in particular, life, free movement and so on.
 3. The right to personal immunity, having undergone a historical evolution, in the field of ideological perception has grown from the aspect of physical freedom and security only to a more comprehensive category, which includes the issues of maintaining both physical and mental immunity (integrity).
 4. From this point of view, the legal regulation of the current Constitution is more complete and progressive, but nevertheless it does not completely consume all the issues related to the right to personal immunity and needs constant improvement of the existing legal regulations in the mentioned field.
 .
