One of the most powerful tenets of classical trade theory is that the scope of international trade is determined by comparative advantage.
  Thus, a country with a comparative advantage in international trade acts as an exporter of a given product, and a country without a comparative advantage, respectively, as an importer of that product.
 Economists have put forward a number of approaches to determining the comparative advantages of countries and the economic conditions that shape them, among which the comparative advantage scales have been more widely used.
 In this respect, the main innovation belongs to Bella Balsa, whose relative export specialization coefficient, otherwise known as the Bella Balsa Index (1965) [1, pp.99-123], is most often used for sectoral analysis of foreign trade.
 Nevertheless, despite its widespread use, the Balsa Index has also been criticized. There are a number of formulas in the professional literature that determine the export specialization.
 In order to study the comparative advantages of the exports of the Republic of Armenia and other EEU member states, we have chosen the Balsa and Lafey indices from the above-mentioned indicators.
 In contrast to formulas comparing the export flows of individual countries or formulas comparing cross-sectoral mutual trade between two partner countries, Bella Balassa and Lafey specialization ratios are considered to be the most realistic approaches to measuring countries' comparative advantages, as they characterize 258 ECONOMICS, trade. 6].
 In addition, these two ratios are used by the United Nations Center for International Trade to calculate the Trade Performance Index (HS) [3].
 The Balassa Index (RCA Index), which characterizes the level of specialization, allows to identify the industries or industries in which the country in question has a clear advantage in terms of international competitiveness.
  This is especially important from the point of view of product orientation of export promotion policy, as the determination of comparative advantages provides an opportunity to focus export promotion processes on more competitive products in international markets.
 The Bella Balsa index is determined by the ratio of the share of individual sectors in the country's exports to its share in world trade.
 where: - i is the level of specialization of the i-th country for the export of j-products, - i is the volume of exports of the j-th country of products, - is the total volume of exports of the i-th country, - the share of exports of the j-th products is selected from the region (or the whole world) - the total volume of world (regional) exports.
 The index can take values ​​[0; + ∞) in the range, moreover, if the value of the index is greater than 1, the country under consideration will be considered specialized in the export of goods of the selected industry and vice versa.
 The Balsa Index is used to describe the specialization of goods or groups of goods for which no export incentives or restrictive measures are applied [3], as otherwise the reliability of the ratio is questionable.
  In other words, the use of trade (particularly export) incentives or barriers does not make it clear whether the country has a comparative advantage over those goods.
 According to this ratio, a country is considered to be specialized in the export of a product, when the share of the given product in the export of the country exceeds the share of the latter in the export of the given region or the world.
  The country has a comparative advantage when the value of this coefficient exceeds one.
 The other indicator we chose in the research is the Lafayette index.
  The Lafayette index is, in fact, also an improved version of the in-branch specialization coefficient, in the formula of which the country's GDP was added [4, p 15].
 The simplified formula for the Lafei index is as follows: where - is the Lafey index, - is the country's GDP.
 Country i has a comparative advantage over a given product or product group when the index exceeds 0.
 The index assumes a comparison of the trade balance of the industry with the theoretically expected balance in the absence of specialization, expressed in terms of GDP.
 The Lafayette index varies in the range (-∞, + ∞).
  Moreover, in case of values ​​greater than 0, the observed country has a comparative advantage among the main competing countries of the world, which export the products of the selected sector.
 260 ECONOMICS As the Lafayette index takes into account both import and export figures, it is more appropriate to describe the specialization of countries with a high level of interstate trade.
  It also takes into account re-export flows.
 Let us now consider the competitive advantages of RA exports according to the selected indices, the results calculated by the 2015 indicators (see Table 1.).
 The data in Table 1 show that the competitive advantages of Balsa and Lafey's exports do not unequivocally assess the country's export potential, as the Lafayette index also shows positive results for not all products that are considered competitive with the Balsa's index.
 slag and ash Natural and artificial fur and articles thereof Chemical fibers Knitted or crocheted clothing and apparel accessories, except machine or handmade articles Stone, gypsum, cement and similar materials Glass and articles made of natural or artificial Pearl, precious or semi-precious metal Metals Copper and articles thereof Aluminum and articles thereof Other non-precious metals, metal-ceramics, articles thereof Watches and parts Thereof, according to the calculations, the export of mining products with relatively high export rates was relatively high, for which the Balsa Index (RCA): Lafayette index (LFI) was 11.3, tobacco and its substitutes (RCA = 48; LFI = 4), alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages and vinegar (RCA = 11.8; LFI = 3), knitted products (RCA = 3.1;
 If we compare the results of the indexes with the actual indicators of the RA export, it will become obvious that the commodity groups recognized as competitive by the Balsa and Lafey indexes have the largest share in the 262 ECONOMICS built in the RA export, and at the same time the positive groups are characterized by positive indexes.
  The phenomenon is explained by the fact that, unlike the first, the Lafayette index is calculated by combining export and import indicators.
 The "Ore, Slag and Ash" product group with the largest share (24.71%) in the export structure of the Republic of Armenia in 2015 also provided the highest net export index. that is, $ 365.9 million.
  At the same time, Armenia accounts for 0.23% of the world exports of this product group. For comparison, it should be noted that the total share of Armenia in world exports is only 0.01%, ie the "Ore, slag and ash" product group provides the country 23 times the total export share in world trade.
 The highest level of specialization in the Balsa Index was provided by the "Tobacco and its industrial substitutes" product group, the latter in 2015. 11.51% of the total export of Armenia and 0.43% of the world export of the product group.
 Certain patterns were observed on the results of the observed indices during the analysis.
  In particular, according to the Balassa index, a higher level of specialization is provided by a relatively large share of world exports, and according to the Lafayette index, countries with a higher positive net export index, which was presumed by the structure of the resolutions.
 Studies show that the level of concentration of the export product and geographical structure of the Republic of Armenia is very high, even in the case of highly specialized export products.
  Thus, for example, in the product group "natural or artificial pearls, precious or semi-precious stones, precious metals", the first 3 out of about 26 products exported from Armenia provide 263 ECONOMICS, 88.8% of the total export, and 3 out of 29 export markets falls 76.2% of the group's exports.
 In order to assess the degree of application of the competitive advantages of export within the EEU, we have studied the levels of export specialization of all member countries and the product structures of mutual trade.
  At the same time, in order to assess the short-term results of the formation of the EEU, the changes in the export product structure of the countries were compared with the results of the research conducted before the final formation of the structure [7, pp. 58-62].
 Thus, according to the statistical sources of the UN International Trade Center, in 2015 24.71% of Armenia's exports were ore, 13.85% - pearls, precious and semi-precious stones, precious metals, 11.51% - tobacco and its substitutes, 7.45% - alcohol , non-alcoholic beverages and vinegar, which respectively have the largest share in world exports (0.23%, 0.03%, 0.43% and 0.11% in world exports, respectively), then it can be stated that specializes in the production of products in these areas.
 Now let's see to what extent Armenia is able to use its comparative advantages in trade with the Russian Federation.
  2015 Armenia exported $ 92.28 million worth of alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages and vinegar to Russia, $ 24.4 million worth of milk and dairy products, poultry eggs, natural honey and other food products of animal origin, $ 22.4 million worth of knitted products, $ 13.2 million $ 39 million worth of fish and crustaceans, $ 12.3 million worth of fruits and nuts, and $ 12 million worth of vegetables and edible roots [8, pp. 56-61].
 According to the NSS, in 2015 Armenia has used its competitive advantages in trade with Russia in the field of alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages and vinegar, as well as knitted products.
 Other products with relatively high exports accounted for competition in Armenia only on the basis of Ba 264 ECONOMICS lassa index, while the two products with the highest index used the highest level of export specialization (ore, slag and ash, ferrous and non-ferrous metals, tobacco and its substitutes, and artificial pearls, precious and semi-precious stones, precious metals) competitive advantages are not used at all or to a sufficient extent.
  In this regard, the lack of exports of raw materials and metals is probably due to the fact that Russia itself is a resource-rich country, while there is an unrealized export potential for tobacco and precious stones.
 In fact, as a result of studies, we come to the conclusion that the foreign trade of the Republic of Armenia with Russia is built in the direction of non-priority specialization product groups, that is, goods are exported to Russia that are not included in the first positions of the export commodity list of the Republic of Armenia.
 2015 Armenia has used its comparative advantages to export to Belarus the following goods: alcoholic, non-alcoholic beverages, vinegar ($ 4.55 million), natural and artificial pearls, precious and semi-precious stones, precious metals ($ 1.3 million), vegetables , products from the processing of parts of fruits, nuts and plants (162.1 thousand US dollars).
  It is noteworthy that Armenia also exported 232.4 thousand tons to Belarus. Optical, photographic measuring, medical or surgical devices and apparatus, their parts and equipment [8, pp. 61-63], in which Armenia, according to the observed ratios, has no competitive advantage.
  Armenia has not used its comparative advantages with other product groups, particularly in 2015. Belarus did not export ore, slag, tobacco, ferrous metals, copper, aluminum, articles made from them, but not precious metals.
 2015 Armenia has used its competitive advantages to export $ 1.41 million to Kazakhstan. There are 265 ECONOMICS and artificial pearls, precious or semi-precious stones, precious metals (instead of $ 779 thousand in 2012) USD alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages and vinegar (instead of USD 1.5 million in 2012), AMD 309.3 thousand USD processing of vegetables, fruits, nuts and plants (instead of 216 thousand USD in 2012), 276.7 thousand. USD ore, slag and ash, 239.4 thousand. US Dollar Pharmaceuticals [8, pp. 64-65].
  Moreover, according to the results of the analysis, Armenia does not have a competitive advantage in the export of the last product group.
 Armenia has not used its comparative advantages with other product groups, particularly in 2015. Kazakhstan did not export ferrous metals, copper, aluminum, articles thereof, other than precious metals, cigarettes and their substitutes, watches and parts.
 In general, trade with Kazakhstan includes very few commodity groups with a generally low cost.
 To the EEU in 2015 Armenia's foreign trade with Kyrgyzstan, which joined in January, is very insignificant. 2015 Armenia-Kyrgyzstan foreign trade turnover amounted to only 496.9 thousand US dollars, of which 370.9 thousand (or 75% of mutual trade) only at the expense of Armenia's exports.
  The export structure is dominated by 3 products: alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages and vinegar ($ 59.9 thousand), pharmaceuticals ($ 261.1 thousand) and electrical machinery and equipment, recorders and their parts ($ 42.4 thousand). USD), only in the first case Armenia has a competitive advantage.
 .
