Ensuring the security and privacy of personal and commercial information in the current age of Internet addiction is a priority for cyber security professionals.
  There are many examples of people stealing personal information for their own benefit.
  So the question arises as to how hackers [2] get what they want.
  This article discusses botnet, one of the most popular and frequently used options.
 According to [3], botnet is a general system of virtual robots or bots that works autonomously and autonomously.
  Botnets work on zombie computers, led by an attacker.
  A typical botnet can be created in four main stages. 592 INFORMATICS 1. Primary infection.  It can be done by various means such as automatic download of malicious software in case of access to the website, USB drive, e-mail, etc.
 2. Secondary infection. ։ At this stage the infected host downloads and executes the bot code, thus creating a real bot.
  Code can be downloaded using ftp, http and P2P protocols (see [4] §2.1).
 3. Harmful actions.  This is the main part of the bot operation, during which the corresponding action is performed after receiving the commands from the regulator.
 4. Maintenance.  At this stage, the digital files of the bot are constantly updated.
 The botnets currently in use actually work on one basic scheme (see Figure 1). CREATOR (Bot master) Command and Control Server (BS) BOT BOT BOT BOT Figure 1.
  Basic scheme of botnet work 593 INFORMATICS Figure 1 shows the scheme describing the work of the currently used botnet, where Bot Bot master ստեղծ botnet creator.
 Րամ Command and Control Server (OSS) համակարգ A system that sends commands corresponding to bots by the creator, essentially a link between the bot and the creator.
  Bot կոCode running on an infected computer, depending on the command from the control server, performs the appropriate action.
 According to [5], botnets are mainly used for large-scale cybercrime, spam and malware (as a paid service for third parties), theft of personal data, re-issuance of banking and online services, DdoS [6] attacks and many more. for harmful actions.
 But, as it is known, there is no system that does not have vulnerabilities. So is the botnet.
  The main task of cyber security professionals is to find the command and control server and identify the creator.
  A system called a honeypot is used to detect botnets.
  The idea behind Honeypot is a specially designed server or web system that is attacked by a botnet by tracking and detecting the command and control server.
 This article proposes a new, more sophisticated and more secure botnet model.
  In contrast, this version is controlled by more than one command and control server, with each HSC created managing a limited number of infected devices, which allows the main server to be protected from being detected even if detected (see Figure 2).
 594 INFORMATICS CREATOR (Bot master) Command and control server Intermediate HCS (C&C) BOT Intermediate HKS (C&C) BOT BOT BOT Figure 2.
  Schematic model of the proposed botnet As already mentioned, the botnet model presented in Figure 2, unlike the previous ones, is governed by more than one HKS.
  The primary and main HKS is created via the Telegram [6] bot, which in turn has a fairly high level of security.
  The work of the botnet is performed in the following order: 1. The main bot is created through the system that creates a special bot for Telegram, which will be the primary HKS.
 2. A command is sent from the Telegram bot.
 3. The command passes through the TOR network [8], and as a result reaches the intermediate HKS to the output node of the TOR network. 4. The commands are written in secret on open and accessible platforms (pastebin, pastecode, facebook, etc.).
 5. Bots (which dynamically change information entry points through steps 3.4) read the command and execute it.
  Each 10 bots is controlled by 1 intermediate control point.
 595 INFORMATICS 6. Bots running on zombie computers read the command once every 13 minutes.
 7. The read command is executed.
 For a more detailed presentation of the proposed model through the block diagram, see Figure 3.
 1. Telegram bot generation2. Sending the appropriate order 3. Passing the command through the TO network4. Transfer of TOR output node to secondary HKS 5./6. Command reading by zombie bots 7. Execution of the command Figure 3. Detailed presentation of the proposed botnet From Figure 3 it is clear that the botnet created by the proposed model differs from the modern known versions with a high level of security.
 596 INFORMATICS Conclusion The article presents a new and modern model of botnet, which, unlike the current ones, is safer for the creator and more sophisticated cyber security professionals.
  The main difference is the three-level protection.
  The command, which is generated from the main HKS, the telegram bot, passes through the TO network.
  The output of the TOR reaches the intermediate SCIs.
  Each of the intermediate SCAs manages no more than 10 bots, which provides additional protection, as a small portion of the entire network is compromised if detected.
  The article presents schematic representations of the current and proposed new model.
 .
