In the modern world, religion is one of the most influential phenomena in the formation of an individual's worldview.
  Religion has an important influence on the social life of different peoples of the world, on the formation of their national characteristics.
  But, unfortunately, religion sometimes becomes the driving force of international conflicts and political upheavals.
  This is probably the reason why states, regardless of the form of government, very often provide positions for religious advisers and theologians in the state mechanism, being very careful when developing state policy in the field of relations with religion and religious organizations.
 Today, the approaches aimed at clarifying and regulating the legal relations between the state and religion do not fully outline the real boundaries of those relations.
  In the legal literature, three forms of state are traditionally mentioned from the degree of involvement of religion in the state: theocracy, theocracy and a secular state.
  We think that this format does not comprehensively include and does not complete the description of the form of the state in the context of the role of religion.
  It should be noted that the institution of religion is not only a legal, but also a moral, philosophical phenomenon, and each state shapes its attitude towards religion in its own way, defines its own "rules of the game".
 In the conducted research, it is necessary to apply the comparative-legal method, considering the foreign experience of solving the problems of cooperation between religious organizations and the state.
 312 JURISDICTION Thus, in terms of the state policy towards religion, the definition of the legal status of religious organizations, the positivism of religious norms and dogmas in the legal system or their inadmissibility, we distinguish the following types of state: 1) theocracy, 2) clergy (state) ) semi-religious or semi-secular state, 5) secular state.
 1) Theocracy.
  This is the form of state in which one of the religious organizations is a state power and has certain goals, tasks, functions, and methods for exercising power.
  Other religious organizations are banned or persecuted.
  Associate Professor of Law M. L. Voronkova mentions that. "In a theocratic state, one of the religious associations is not separated from the state and does not take an oppositional position towards it."
  1 In such a state, the citizen has no right to choose not only religion but also worldview. he is obliged to believe in the religion defined by the state.
  The only such state in the modern world is the Vatican.
  It was established in 1929. By the agreement signed between Benito Mussolini and Pope Pius XI on February 11 (Lateran Concordat) 2.
  In the Vatican, where the secular and spiritual leader of the state is the Pope, the Holy See has the status of a sovereign subject in accordance with international law.
  In the Armenian reality, the old Armenian state formations were theocracy.
 Aratta, referred to in the Sumerian epic as "sacred laws and immortals", was a theocratic state in which secular and spiritual authority. See Voronkova ML Constitutional foundations of world power in the Russian Federation.
  dis. Kand.Grid. science 12,00,02 Saratov 2006 p 36.
 See, The Gods Are Dying, Scientific-Atheistic Chronicle State Publishing House of Armenia, Yerevan 1962 Page 151 313 JURISDICTION was in the hands of a spiritual class that ruled the earth in the name of God.
 2) A clerical state.
  The authority of the clerical state explicitly endows any religious organization with separate state powers.
  In such countries, state religion is often formally established, and its religious leaders are part of the state authorities, or representatives of state authorities are also granted religious status.
  As in the theological state, so in the clergy, the spheres of influence and authority of religious organizations and the state intersect or completely coincide.
  Many states are on the border of theological and clerical states (Islamic Republic of Iran, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Republic of Somalia, Emirate of Qatar, etc.).
 Of particular interest are the most economically developed countries, such as Iran and Saudi Arabia.
  The main source of law and order in Saudi Arabia is the Qur'an, and the second normative legal act is the "Basic Order (provision) of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia".
  According to Article 1 of the Basic Nizam, "The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is a sovereign Arab Islamic State.
  His religion is Islam, the Constitution is the Book of the Most High Allah and the Sunnah of his Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, the language is Arabic, and the capital is Riyadh. ”
  Article 7 stipulates: "Power in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is based on the Book of the Most High Allah and the Sunnah of His Prophet, which are the basis of this provision and other state acts."
  4 Served in Saudi Arabia, Artak Movsisyan. 5000-year-old Armenian statehood. Popular science picture book / second revised edition / Edit Print Publishing House Yerevan 2016 page 9 See, Constitution of Asia / under. Habriev G.-M.
  Institute of Legislation and Comparative Law in the RF Norma 2010 c492.
 314 JURISDICTION The only and only religion is Islam, all other religions are forbidden.
  The conversion of citizens to another religion is punishable by death.
  Foreigners traveling to Saudi Arabia have a religion clearance because they are not allowed to enter the Muslim holy cities of Medina and Mecca in addition to followers of Islam.
 As for the Islamic Republic of Iran, the adoption of laws here is also conditioned by the observance of Sharia norms.
  Thus, Article 12 of the Iranian Constitution states: "The official religion of Iran is Jafari-oriented Islam, which recognizes the existence of twelve Imams, and this principle will remain unchanged forever.
  "Islamic denominations, in particular, Hanafi, Shafi'i, Malikit, Hanbalit, Zayd, deserve full respect."
  5 The Supreme Leader of Iran (Rahbar) is the spiritual leader, elected by one of the main governing bodies, the Council of Experts.
  In addition to the Council of Experts, there is also the Council of Defenders of the Constitution, which exercises control over the Majlis (parliament).
  The council itself does not draft bills, but it does verify the compliance of each bill in the Majlis with Sharia law and the Constitution.
  The bill may be rejected by the Council if it contradicts the Constitution or Sharia.
 It should be noted that Article 13 of the Iranian Constitution recognizes only three religions besides Islam. "Iranian Zoroastrians, Jews and Christians, who are religious minorities and can freely perform their religious rites within the law and in terms of religious upbringing in civil matters, are guided by their teachings."
  6 At present, Islam is one of the political-ideological bases of most Arab states.
 See, Hachim F.I. Constitutional Law Near the Middle East РУДН 2001 с 34 See ibid., Pp. 35 315 JURISDICTION On the one hand, it contributes to the stabilization of political regimes, and on the other hand, it creates various contradictions in a number of spheres of public life.
 The definition of Islam as a state religion is typical of states with a monotheistic population.
  Religion plays a big role in the state structure of these countries, there are religious norms in the legislative acts (Sharia). It should be noted that traditions have a significant role in the political life of the Arab states.
  The constitutions of most Arab countries enshrine adherence to the traditions of Islam, which is a strong moral and psychological foundation of society.
 In a clerical state, the interrelationship between religion and law represents the replacement of law by religious norms.
 Article 7 of the Constitution of the United Arab Emirates provides: "Islam is the official religion of the union, and Sharia is the official source of legislation."
  Article 2.3 of the Somali Constitution stipulates: "A law that does not comply with the general principles of Sharia can not be adopted."
 A very contradictory provision is enshrined in the Iraqi Constitution. "No law can be adopted if it contradicts the established norms of Islam, no law can be adopted if it contradicts the principles of democracy."
  It seems that the norms of Islam are equal to the principles of democracy.
 Israel's religion policy is often described as a monarchy.
  Religion has historically been the protective shield of the Jewish people and has guided them for thousands of years.
  In the absence of an official Constitution in the legal system of the Republic of Israel, see, Constitution of Asia / below. Habriev G s 424 See, Temporary Constitution of Somalia 2012 01,08,2012 See, Constitution of Asia / under. Хабриев Г с 192 316 JURISDICTION The Declaration of Independence and the basic laws of the state occupy a prominent place.
  The Declaration of Independence guarantees the right of citizens to freedom of conscience and religion, as well as their equality without discrimination on the basis of religion, race or sex10.
  Although Judaism does not have the status of an official religion in the state, it still plays a huge role in shaping the self-consciousness and worldview of members of society.
  The main characteristic of the Republic of Israel as a state of religion is the existence of religious law in the sources of law (Torah, Talmud).
  In addition to secular schools, there are state religious schools in Israel where the Torah is compulsory.
  There are special religious courts in the judiciary11, and the Ministry of Religious Affairs operates in the executive branch.
 3) Atheist state.
  In an atheistic state, the religious worldview is denied, the society is forced to have an atheistic ideology, any religious organization is persecuted and destroyed.
 The atheist worldview is part of the state ideology, which is propagated by all institutions of power.
  Citizens do not have the right to freedom of conscience and religion, as well as the right to be satisfied with their religious needs, to perform religious rites, to follow religious regulations.
  In only one country in the world is atheistic ideology enshrined in the Constitution (Albania 1976).
 The Soviet Union was only a secular state "on paper", but in reality it was an atheist.
 4) A semi-secular or semi-religious state.
  Nomination of this form of state by us is conditioned by some See, Declaration of Independence of Israel Ratified 14.05.1948 See, Yedidia Z. SterReligion, state, and the Jewish identity crisis in Israel 1775 317 with the impossibility of ranking.
  In our view, a semi-religious or semi-secular state is an intermediate link between the clergy and the forms of the secular state in the context of the cooperation between religion and the state.
  The state, based on its historical experience, traditions, and the most popular religious denomination, can decide with which religious organization it wants to create a field of close cooperation.
  In such countries, any religion or religious organization has a officially defined privileged position and is given a certain preference by the state.
  The Constitution and legislative acts enshrine the state's dependence on a religious organization and vice versa.
  A semi-secular or semi-religious state, such a secular state, recognizes and guarantees the right to freedom of conscience and religion, at the same time in such a state religious norms are not considered a source of law.
 However, in contrast to a secular state, the established church dominates or dominates in a semi-religious (semi-secular) state.
  As a rule, high-ranking clergymen are appointed by the state authorities, and for some state positions requirements are set based on religious beliefs.
  Semi-religious or semi-secular states provide material, political, support for the official or dominant religion, and sometimes levy religious taxes on citizens.
 Thus, in the Kingdom of Denmark, the Evangelical Lutheran Church has the status of an official religion enshrined in the Constitution13.
  The head of the church is the monarch, and his authority is given to the Religious Affairs See https.
 //www.britannica.com/topic/established-church See, Constitution of the Soviet Corps from 5 June 1953 to the Ministry of Law (Kirkeministeriet) 14.
 The territory of the kingdom is divided into ten dioceses, the spiritual leaders of which, the bishops, are appointed by the monarch on the recommendation of the Minister of Religious Affairs.
  According to Article 6, Part 2, Clause 6 of the Constitution, the monarch must be a member of the Evangelical Lutheran Church15.
  The charter of the Evangelical-Lutheran Church is defined by a separate law.
 The Kingdom of Norway also meets the characteristics of a semi-religious state.
  Here the state, recognizing the right of everyone to freedom of conscience, declares the Evangelical-Lutheran Church the official, state religion.
  Article 4 of the Constitution states: "The king is obliged to profess the Evangelical-Lutheran religion, to provide support and protection to it."
 The suffrage of the members of the Norwegian State Council is limited by the requirements conditioned by the religion.
  Article 12 of the Constitution states that: "More than half of the members of the State Council must profess the official, state religion."
  And here in the second part of Article 27, as a logical continuation of the above-mentioned, it is stated that "a member of the State Council who does not profess an official-state religion may not participate in the discussions concerning the state church" 16.
 The Norwegian Ministry of Culture and Religion is part of the executive branch, and its minister is to be considered a member of the Evangelical Lutheran Church.
 5) Secular state.
  The secular form of the state presupposes, first of all, the separation of religious organizations from the state.
  Such separation, however, does not predetermine the isolation of religious organizations. See the official website of the Ministry of Religious Affairs of the Kingdom of Denmark: http.
 //www.km.dk/ministeren/ See, Constituency of the Soviet Union from June 5, 1953 See, Constitution of the Republic of Norway from May 17, 1814 319 JURISDICTION, moreover, each reserves its own independence, respects its own independence.
  In a secular state, religious rules are not part of the legal system of the state, the right to freedom of conscience and religion is recognized and guaranteed.
 Today, from the point of view of fixing and implementing the principle of secularism, secular states are not homogeneous and do not have a unified structure.
 It is directly related to social processes, which are greatly influenced by the historical, political, cultural and moral peculiarities of the development of the state and law.
  The realization of the principle of secularism of the state directly depends on the degree of implementation of this or that sign of separation of religious organizations from the state, the degree of restriction of fundamental human rights and freedoms.
 Based on the comparative-legal analysis of constitutional and other legal acts of foreign countries, we have discovered that states have certain features in the issue of secularization of the principle of secularism, which are expressed in: 1) Direct fixation of the principle of secular state in the Constitution: Kazakhstan, Turkey, France, Russia , India, etc.).
  In the context of relations with religion, the legal regulation of religious organizations, let us consider the legal experience of some states.
 According to the first article of the Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan, "The Republic of Kazakhstan declares itself a democratic, secular, legal and social state, the highest values ​​of which are the person, his life, rights and freedoms" 17.
  The Constitution of Kazakhstan also enshrines the freedom of conscience of every person. for the protection of freedoms, the health and morals of the population18.
 The preamble to the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan on Religious Activities and Organizations states that Kazakhstan "... recognizes the historical role of Khanate Islam and Orthodox Christianity in the development of the people's cultural and spiritual life, respects other religions that are interrelated with the spiritual life of the people of Kazakhstan." with heritage ... ”19.
  It should be noted that by appreciating the role of Khanate Islam and Orthodox Christianity, the state does not give them any legal privileges over other religions, but ensures universal equality.
 The activities of religious organizations and the holding of religious ceremonies are prohibited in the state bodies, educational and healthcare institutions, military units of the Republic of Kazakhstan20.
  According to Article 5 4 4 of the Constitution, the activities of religious parties are prohibited21.
 In his message "Strategy Kazakhstan-2020" addressed to the people of Kazakhstan, President Nursulman Nazarbayev stressed the importance of the state's secularism. "We are proud to be part of the Muslim community.
  These are our traditions.
  But see, in the same place art. 22, 39.
 See Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan of October 11, 2011 No 483-IV "On religious See in the same place.
 See, Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan from 30 August 1995 (In editorial 321 JURISDICTION should not forget that we also have the traditions of a secular society, that Kazakhstan is a secular state.
  The secular nature of our state is an important condition for the successful development of Kazakhstan22.
 The experience of the Republic of Turkey as a secular state is remarkable.
  Turkey is the first country in the Islamic world where the institution of religion was separated from the state.
  The constitution adopted in 1937 enshrined the "six arrows" concept of "Kemalism" as the ideology of Turkish nationalism, the last point of which, "laicism", essentially refers to the introduction of the principle of secularism of the state.
  The inadmissibility of state organizations and participation in religious organizations was established24.
 The preamble to the current Turkish Constitution states that according to the principle of state secularism, religious and religious sentiments cannot influence state affairs and politics25.
  The second article of the Constitution stipulates: "The Republic of Turkey is a democratic, secular, social state based on the rule of law ..." 26.
  The Constitution reserves the right to freedom of conscience, religion and belief 27.
 2007 Kemal զ Kemalism was based on six principles: 1) Republicanism, 2) Nationalism, on behalf of Foreign Minister Abdullah Gül, President's Foreign Minister Abdullah Gül See Post of the People of Kazakhstan under the title "Strategy of Kazakhstan-2050" 4 , 3) popularity, 4) statism, 5) laicism, 6) revolution.
  See RF Muhammetdinov. Captivity and Evolution See ibid., P. 159 See, Constitution of the Turkish Republics Introduced on November 7, 1982. See, in the same place Art. 2nd.
 See, in the same place Art. 24th.
 322 JURISDICTION The heated controversy over his candidacy was essentially due to his Islamic views.
  The Kemalists, who were staunch supporters of the secularism of the state, accused Gul and Erdogan of establishing Islamic rule in Turkey.
  2008 The "Justice and Development" party together with two other parties presented a package of constitutional amendments to the parliament, in particular on lifting the ban on women and girls wearing headscarves in educational and state institutions.
  The issue of the constitutionality of this amendment to the Constitution was challenged in the Turkish Constitutional Court and as a result it was declared unconstitutional29.
 Turkey, once a flag bearer of the Islamic world, is still facing difficulties in reconciling the principle of secularism proclaimed by the Constitution and the deep-rooted Islamic value system.
  On April 25, 2016, the Speaker of the Turkish Parliament Ismail Kahraman stated during one of the conferences held in the context of constitutional reforms about the need to clarify the role of Islam in the Constitution. "We are an Islamic country ... secularism should not have a place in the new constitution" 30.
 When considering the foreign experience of the realization of the principle of secularism of the state, it will not be justified if we do not mention the example of the French Republic.
 France was the first in the world to pass a law on the separation of church and state, which declared it invalid in 1801. Napoleon Bonaparte, History of the Republic of Turkey, University Textbook / R. Safrastyan et al.- Yerevan YSU Publishing House 2014 pp. 319-325 See ibid. pp. 321-322 See Ismail Kahraman's statement at a meeting in Istanbul 323 JURISDICTION and the Concordat signed between Pope Pius VIII.
  The law, passed in 1905, did not apply to Alsace and Lorraine, which were then part of Germany.
 France stopped funding state religious institutions and turned most of their property into state property.
  As a result, the process of "secularization" caused enormous material damage (about one billion francs) to the French Catholic Church32.
 In modern times, France continues to maintain its status as a secular state.
  According to Article 1 of the Constitution, "France is considered an indivisible, secular, social, democratic republic.
  It guarantees the equality of all citizens before the law, regardless of origin, race or religion. ”33
 Frequent religious and political attacks force the French authorities not to deviate from the path of secularization and to take drastic action to ensure the safe and harmonious development of society.
  Evidence of this is the bill "On Strengthening Internal Security and Combating Terrorism" submitted to the Parliament by French Interior Minister Gerard Calon on September 25, 2017, which provides guarantees to simplify the legal procedure for closing religious institutions if there is a valid statement on terrorism.
  2017 On October 18, the French Senate approved the bill by 244 votes to 22.
 See Ponkin IV P56 Century of the French Law on the Separation of the Church and See ibid., P. 25 See Constitution of the French Republic of 1958, as amended, introduced See http: // www.
 //www.bfmtv.com/police-justice/la-loi-antiterroriste-adoptee-definitivement324 JURISDICTION The principle of a secular state is also enshrined in the supreme law of the Republic of India.
  The introduction to the Indian Constitution states: "We, the people of India, have solemnly decided to define India as a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic Republic."
  The same preamble states that "freedom of thought, expression, belief, creed and worship" are guaranteed35.
 Fundamental human and civil rights and freedoms in India include the right to freedom of religion.
  Article 25 of the Constitution defines the freedom of conscience, religion, creed, religious rites and religious propaganda.
 Of particular interest is Article 28 of the Constitution, which stipulates the freedom to attend religious classes and to worship in certain educational institutions. "No religious instruction shall take place in an educational institution which is funded by the State. No one shall be compelled to attend or attend a religious service which is recognized by the State or which exists at the expense of the State." if he was a minor, his guardian did not give his consent. ”36
 2. Mediated enshrinement of the principle of a secular state in the constitution (Bulgaria, Armenia, Georgia, Austria, Germany, USA, Switzerland, Belgium, Mexico, Brazil, Australia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Venezuela, etc.).
 The constitutional rights clauses of Canada and Bosnia and Herzegovina speak quite briefly about freedom of conscience and religion.
  It can be assumed that See, Maklakov VV Constitution of the lost foreign school. Пособие // Маклаков В.В. 4 See ibid., P. .
 The constitutions of the USA, Australia and Switzerland, fix the inviolable elements of a secular state.
  According to Article 15 of the Swiss Constitution: “Freedom of conscience and religion is guaranteed.
  "Everyone has the right to freedom of choice and religion; and to believe in it alone or with others."
 Article 16 of the Australian Constitution states: "The Australian Union has no jurisdiction to establish legal norms concerning the state religion or forms of worship or to restrict freedom of religion."
 The first amendment to the US Constitution contains the following rule: "Congress should not promulgate any legislation regarding the definition of religion or the prohibition of any free religion, or the right of the people to petition the government for peaceful association and to seek redress, restricting freedom of speech and the press."
 A large number of US Supreme Court rulings banning the state from providing any kind of financial support, including financial support, to religious organizations are based on Thomas Jefferson, one of the authors of the Declaration of Independence.
  В 3-х т / Л.А. Okunyakova Institute See, Constitution of Australia (Prin 19ta 1900 / Lost in force 1,01,1901 / Layout See, Bill of Rights 1789-1791 (First 10 Corrections to the Constitution of the USSR) 326 The church is known for its and the high dividing wall between the state ”40.
 3. Secular states defined by state or traditional religion (church).
 (Bulgaria, Armenia, Georgia, Andorra, Argentina) It is necessary to distinguish between the concepts of state or official religion and compulsory religion.
  Sometimes these expressions are used together to create certain conceptual errors.
  In the legal literature, the terms state and official religion are identified and used as synonyms.
  The proclamation of a state or official religion is not in conflict with the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion.
  At present, a number of developed democracies of the world have given preference to any religion, recognizing it as state or official, at the same time guaranteeing the right of everyone to freedom of conscience and religion.
  The problem is different in case of recognition of obligatory religion.
  It is more typical of the theocracies and religions.
  Ideological pluralism is an inseparable element of a secular state.
  It is obvious that any obligatory ideology cannot be compatible with both the right to freedom of conscience and the principle of secularism of the state.
 A traditional religious organization may or may not have state status.
  Regardless of that circumstance, it plays a great role in the state in the field of cultural education, preservation and development of national-religious traditions.
  It should be noted that international law does not see any contradiction between the principle of secularism of the state and the recognition of the privilege of any religious organization by the state.
  However, the secularism of the state is sometimes in a clash of civilizations with the historical See of this or that secular state See, L. Dreisbach, "Sowing Useful Truths and Principles".
  The Danbury Baptists, 327 JURISDICTION with experience, traditions, societal perceptions and spiritual perceptions.
  The result is that such states go far beyond the status quo of secularism in satisfying their spiritual needs.
  Religions in secular lands are manifested in the active participation of members of the clergy in government activities, in the swearing-in of the presidents in the Holy Scriptures, in religious observances, and in other manifestations.
 The government of Andorra, as a secular state, has developed its own unique approach to religion.
  The vast majority of the population (about 90%) adheres to the Catholic Church.
  Article 11 of the Constitution guarantees "freedom of thought, religion and worship, the right of everyone to freedom of opinion, religion and belief."
  According to the same article, the Constitution "guarantees the free and public activity of the Catholic Church and the support of special cooperation relations with the state, based on Andorran traditions."
  "The Constitution recognizes the associations approved by the Catholic Church, which have the status of a legal entity in accordance with its legal norms and full functionality ..." 42.
  In addition to these benefits, the Andorran Constitution recognizes ecclesiastical marriages as state.
  43 In some secular countries, presidents take the oath of office only during the inauguration ceremony (Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan).
  According to the tradition, the presidents of the Russian Federation swear with their right hand on the Constitution and their left hand on the symbol of the presidential power.
  All US presidents, with some exceptions, have sworn in the Bible.
  In the Republic of Armenia, by virtue of tradition, the inauguration of presidents is performed on the Vehamor Gospel, which is placed in the right hand at the same time as the Constitution and the state symbol.
 See Constituency of the Principalities of Andorra 14 March 1993 See ibid., Article 13, Part 1.
 328 JURISDICTION The Catholic Church also plays an important role in the public life of the people of Argentina, in the development of national traditions, as a result of which the state has established a partnership with the Catholic Church.
  Article 2 of the Argentine Constitution states: "The Federal Government shall support the worship of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Church."
 The state guarantees the right of everyone to freedom of religion.
  It is noteworthy that before 1994 According to the constitutional amendments, the President of the Republic of Argentina was to be a follower of the Catholic Church.
 Article 13 of the Bulgarian Constitution states: "1) freedom of religion, 2) religious institutions are separated from the state, 3) Eastern Orthodox faith is the traditional religion in the Republic of Bulgaria, 4) Religious communities and institutions, as well as religious beliefs can not be used for political purposes."
 However, the definition of state religion in a secular state, in our opinion, does not violate the essence and significance of the principle of secularism, if in that state: a) the right to freedom of conscience and religion is recognized and guaranteed, b) the state does not impose religious and civil rights on religious grounds c) religious rules are not included in the sources of law, d) religious organizations do not participate in public administration, and their religious representatives cannot be appointed by state authorities.
 See, Constitution of the Argentine Republics of the Principality of the General Constitution329 JURISDICTION At the same time, in the framework of this research it is necessary to emphasize the study of the experience of the realization of the principle of secularism in the field of education in different countries.
  The issue of teaching the subject of religious orientation in educational institutions is solved in different ways in foreign countries.
  Article 24 of the Belgian Constitution contains the following provision: "Schools organized by the state authorities provide a choice between teaching one of the recognized religions and non-religious morality until the end of compulsory schooling."
 In Germany, according to the Constitution, religious education is compulsory in schools.
  Article 7 of the Constitution states: "Religious education in public schools, except for non-religious schools, is a compulsory subject.
  Religious education is conducted in accordance with the principles of religious communities without prejudice to the right of state control.
  No teacher may be obliged to conduct religious instruction against his will. ”46
 Kazakhstan also recognizes the principle of secularism in education.
  According to Article 3, Part 4 of the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan "On Religious Activities and Religious Organizations". "The education and upbringing system of the Republic of Kazakhstan, with the exception of religious (religious) educational organizations, is separated from religion and religious associations and has a secular nature" 47.
 In addition, in 2010 in Kazakhstan was introduced on an optional basis (optional) "Fundamentals of Religion" See Constitution of the States of Europe.
  В 3-х т. / Общ. OK. and vstup. st. Л. А. See Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan of October 11, 2011 No 483-IV "On Religion 330 LAW.
  According to the order 48 of the Minister of Education and Science of the Republic of Kazakhstan, in 2016 The subject "Secularism and Fundamentals of Religion" was introduced in the 9th grades of secondary schools of Kazakhstan, the teaching of which was reserved only for specially trained history teachers.
 And Article 24 of the Mexican Constitution quite radically defines: "Freedom of religion is guaranteed, the principles of which should be guided by education, and the latter should not have anything to do with any religious teaching, it should be based on the progress of science and serve the fight against ignorance and its consequences - slavery, fanaticism and prejudice" 49 .
 Thus, analyzing the experience of foreign countries in forming relations with the institution of religion and, in particular, in this context, studying the peculiarities of the realization of the principle of secularism of states, the following conclusions can be presented in a general way: 1) In theocratic, clerical, atheist states, citizens do not have the right to freedom of conscience or the latter is significantly restricted.
  Such states are in essence opposed to the secular form of the state.
  The conflict is also that the atheist state is also the opposite of the theological and clerical state, where the religious organizations are completely See, View by Minister of Education and Science of the Republic of Kazakhstan from 15 July 2014 See, Constitution of the Mexican United States0,1917 from 05 331 JURISDICTION are isolated from public life and social processes, as well as deprived of any status.
  Between these extremes there is a semi-secular or semi-religious form of state, which contains certain features of both secular state and religion.
 2) The definition of a secular state is based on such features as: a) enshrining in the normative legal acts the right to freedom of conscience and religion, b) inadmissibility of including religious rules and dogmas in the sources of law, c) restriction of fundamental human rights and freedoms conditioned by religion, especially suffrage inadmissibility; d) the ban on the participation of religious figures in public administration.
 3) We reject the widespread view of the absence of state or official religion in the concept of state secularism.
  In our opinion, there is currently no weighty theory that considers the terms "state religion" and "secular state" incompatible.
  In our opinion, the proclamation of a state or official religion is not yet a basis for not considering the state secular, but it is a starting point for the criteria by which relations with religious organizations are carried out.
 4) Secular states are not homogeneous in their behavior towards religion and are guided by the accumulated national, religious, cultural customs and traditions, which, in fact, outline their national moral basis and description.
  The legal enshrinement of the principle of secularism does not yet fully guarantee its steady realization and implementation.
  This is especially true of those states where one of the religious organizations has traditionally played a significant role in the establishment and development of the cultural, moral, value system of that state or nation.
 .
