In order to find out the peculiarities of the various links between education and the labor market in Armenia, in the framework of this article we have analyzed the number of employed by educational level, the number of unemployed by educational level, the quality of graduates by employers and the labor supply-demand ratio by sectors.
 2015 According to the data, the distribution of the employed in Armenia according to the level of education shows that those with higher and postgraduate education fill only 28% of the employed (344,700 people), yielding to those with secondary general education (43% or 461,700 people) [5 ].
  24% of the employed have secondary vocational and incomplete higher education, 2% have pre-vocational education, 7% have basic general education, and 1% have attended only primary school.
 Similar indicators were registered in case of unemployment. Those with the highest level of education (27.8% of the registered unemployed or 67,800 people) have a significant share in the total number of unemployed and are second only to those with general secondary education (40.9% or 99,700 people).
 The comparison of the number of employed and unemployed by individual educational levels shows that those with 227 ECONOMICS, especially those with secondary general education, have wider employment opportunities.
  The basis for such a conclusion was the share of the population separated by educational levels among the total number of employed and unemployed.
  Thus, 43% of the employed and 40% of the unemployed have general secondary education.
 The share of the employed and the unemployed in favor of the employed is among those with higher and postgraduate education (29.1% of the employed and 27.8% of the unemployed), as well as in the case of the population with elementary and incomplete primary education. This group of the population accounts for 5.4% of the employed and 4.15% of the unemployed.
  The employment and unemployment rates of the population with basic and pre-vocational education are proportional.
 Compared to the total share of the employed in the economy of the Republic of Armenia, the share of the population with the average professional and incomplete higher, as well as the population with higher and postgraduate education is large.
  2015 According to the data, 22.7% of the employed and 27% of the unemployed received secondary vocational education.
 It turns out that those with secondary vocational and higher education in the Armenian economy have more limited opportunities for employment than the population with a lower general secondary education level.
 The correspondence between work and qualification is higher among those with primary and incomplete elementary (98.4%), basic general (99.8%) and secondary general (99.5%) education.
  Conversely, at higher levels of education, the gap between actual and job qualifications is widening.
  In particular, in 2014 The work done corresponded to the educational qualification of 72.8% of those with pre-professional (vocational) education, 69% of those with secondary vocational or incomplete higher education and 81% of those with higher or postgraduate education, which means that 228 ECONOMICS specialists The level of "professional unemployment" is especially high in the region.
 In our opinion, the high rate of employment and qualification of the unskilled population is based on the fact that the persons included in this group occupy the lowest qualifications or jobs that do not require qualifications at all, therefore, if they are employed, they mostly work in accordance with their qualifications.
  On the other hand, those with higher education are forced to move to jobs that require lower qualifications if they do not find a job that meets their qualifications.
  At the same time, employers are more likely to hire those with higher education, regardless of qualifications.
 The quality of the workforce and the insufficient level of education of the graduates have been the subject of extensive discussions by local businessmen and leaders.
  The prevailing opinion is that in general the graduates are not ready to work in their professional fields due to the lack of both theoretical and practical knowledge and skills.
  Thus, there is a big gap between the level of improvement of the education system and the real demand of the economy.
  Taking advantage of the oversaturation of the labor market with higher education professionals, employers make unjustified demands (work experience, excellent knowledge of foreign languages, training and relevant qualifications, etc.) for jobs that are not qualified for the workforce and for which the pay is significantly lower. the amount of remuneration of employees with relevant experience.
 It turns out that people with higher education are more vulnerable in the labor market than other labor resources and are more likely to avoid unemployment in order to avoid unemployment.
 All this proves that the RA labor market is oversaturated with specialists with higher education.
  The current situation contributes to the growth of "brain drain" rates from Armenia.
 For years, the neglect of employers' demands and the supply-demand ratio in the labor market has led to overproduction of staff in certain professions, severance of university-employer, university-labor market relations, in which conditions being a university graduate is not a guarantee of employment at all.
 The paradox of the high level of population involvement in the education system and the low quality of education can be explained by the very low level of investment in the Armenian education system.
  Thus, if we map the indicators of educational investment and involvement in higher education in the countries of the world, it becomes clear that Armenia is one of the countries with the lowest level of expenditures per student in the higher education system.
 The study of labor supply and demand in the priority sectors of the Armenian economy has shown that some of the low-knowledge-based positions (textile and light industry, watchmaking, diamonds, jewelry and food industry) do not require highly qualified specialists with higher education.
  In fact, the above-mentioned positions need specialists with primary and secondary professional education in the field.
  However, at present in Armenia in almost all spheres there is an openness of the above-mentioned primary and secondary vocational education system, which must be filled in order to optimize the training of the sphere workforce and to effectively address the needs of the sphere.
 Recently, the latest 230 ECONOMICS mechanisms aimed at strengthening the university-labor market connection have been widely used in international practice.
  In the Netherlands, for example, professors who teach useful, profitable courses should be better paid.
 In the field of educational program design, the "tuning" methodology becomes dominant, which allows to adapt the structure and content of the designed programs to the needs and requirements of the labor market.
 In order to absorb the entire supply of university graduates by the labor market, continuous economic growth is needed, which will be accompanied by the creation of new jobs.
 In general, there are certain disproportions in almost all spheres of the RA economy.
  This is especially true for jobs where higher education is a compulsory requirement (particularly in the IT sector). This fact underscores the imperfection of the higher education system in Armenia, which is reflected in the additional financial and time costs incurred by employers in training graduates.
 At the same time, the demand for a new workforce with higher education will be high in the knowledge-based and labor-intensive sectors.
  Given the economic development trends and structural changes, as well as the growth forecasts of a number of markets, the creation of new vacancies in the coming years is more likely in the following areas: financial / business services, IT, Internet services and precision engineering, health services, trade, etc.
  Moreover, due to the general development of the economy, the growth of the demand of economists in almost all spheres is predicted.
 Thus, the comparative analysis of the RA educational services and labor market allowed to make the following conclusions. Տես Theoretical training of students predominates in educational programs, graduates do not have enough practical skills and abilities for scientific activities, effective professional orientation,  The dialogue between different levels of education, as well as education and economy is weak, social partnership mechanisms, education system are not enough It is not able to respond quickly and effectively to the rapid development of society and the economy.
 In order to improve the situation, we consider it necessary: ​​հաստատ Establishing feedback with the labor market, involving employers in the processes of expertise and modernization of educational programs.
 ։ Improving the service and competitiveness of graduates.
 ։ Improving the mastery of modern teaching methods and technologies of teaching staff, increasing the efficiency of training, introducing an effective system of professional advancement of pedagogues.
 ։ Increasing the economic relevance of educational programs, bringing their directions and content closer to the current demands of the labor market, which implies reviewing the existing detailed list of professions and reorienting them to the market demand.
 In our opinion, the mechanisms for solving the set problems should be considered not at the national level, but at the intra-university level, offering a prescription for each university based on the peculiarities of its activity.
 .
