Avetis Aharonyan, Nikol Aghbalyan, Garnik Kalashyan, Derenik Demirchyan, Levon Shant and others were among the individuals who had a significant contribution to the independence, strengthening and establishment of the state of the Republic of Armenia.
  1918-1920 of the mentioned figures. Many details of the activity are shrouded in secrecy or are unknown to the reader.
  Sometimes they received contradictory assessments.
  Well-known writer, ARF member Levon Shant (1869-1951) can also be included in this list.
 1919 As a result of the June 21-23 parliamentary elections in the Republic of Armenia (which was boycotted by the influential political force, the ruling People's Party), 72 out of 80 seats were occupied by the ruling party, H. Յ. The ARF.
  Levon Shant was also among the intellectuals who became deputies with the latter quota.
  The solemn opening of the newly elected parliament of Armenia took place on August 1, and on August 5 the leadership was elected.
  Avetis Aharonyan was elected Speaker of the Armenian Parliament with 37 votes in favor, 3 against, Sargis Araratyan was elected Vice Speaker with 36 votes in favor and 4 against, and Shant was elected Speaker with 39 votes in favor and 1 against [6, p. 236].
 The latter submitted an application to dismiss us from the post of vice-president in 1920 for unknown reasons. on April 9 [6, p. 486].
  By the way, during the next re-election of the leadership of the Armenian Parliament in 1920 as well. On November 4, 1945, Levon Shant was re-elected Vice President [6, p. 538], holding office until the sovietization of Armenia (December 2).
 While Avetis Aharonyan, who was elected Speaker of the Armenian Parliament, was in Paris, so the powers of the Speaker of the Parliament in 1919 from August to 1920 November 4 (when Hovhannes Kajaznuni was elected Speaker of the Parliament) was actually carried out by the Vice-Speakers.
  This is due to the fact that the sittings of the parliament were chaired by Sargis Araratyan, then Hovsep Arghutyan, who replaced him on August 10, Sirakan Tigranyan, who replaced him on September 16, and also in 1919. Avetik Sahakyan, who has been the deputy speaker of the parliament since November 6, and, of course, Levon Shant.
 During the period of Armenia's independence and during the next more than a year (including the days of being elected a member of parliament) L. Shant was in Europe.
  Thus, in 1918 We see him in Lausanne in July 1919. in January in Paris, etc. [12, pp. 279–280].
  Shant writes in his memoirs. "I passed Yerevan in the last days of December 1919" [9, page 29].
  The problem, however, is that years later the writer did not remember this episode of his biography correctly.
  The point is that in the published version of the minutes of the sittings of the RA Parliament we meet him for the first time already 361 HISTORY 1919. on December 8. He was the chairman of that day's sitting [6, p. 375].
  However, this fact does not allow us to claim that Shant had not participated in the sittings of the parliament before.
  The problem is that he was not one of the active deputies, he made relatively few speeches.
  Shant later remembers that he had to study the rules of holding sessions and the current laws in advance.
  "With great caution, I began my presidency step by step, until little by little I began to practice," he recalls [9, p. 29].
  Shant's participation in the work of the parliament was mostly limited by chairing sittings.
  Thus, he headed the parliament in 1919. December 8-12, 22-27, 30 - 1920 The sittings of January 10, February 4-25, March 15-19, April 3 [6, pp. 375-384, 399-407, 420-440, 444-454, 463-471, 478481].
  Surprisingly, he was also passive in the 1919 parliament. During the December 24 sitting, when the project of declaring Armenian the state language was discussed under his chairmanship [6, pp. 403-407].
 Shant's only extensive speech in the parliament was in 1920. The January 25 jubilee sitting was dedicated to the de facto recognition of Armenia's independence by the Supreme Council of the Allies on January 19 in Paris.
  It was received with joy in Yerevan and celebrated with great pomp [8, pp. 152–153].
  In his speech, Shant emphasized that the origin and development of historical phenomena is based on three factors: the normal arrangement of historical events, the will of the neighboring great and powerful peoples and, according to him, the most important thing - the will of the people.
  Accordingly, he stressed that the independence of Armenia, which is an important achievement for the Armenians, is the result of the efforts and bloodshed of several generations [6, pp. 440-441].
 The most fateful period of Levon Shant's activity begins in 1920. since May.
 1920 After winning the war against the anti-Soviet forces in the North Caucasus in March 1945, the Red Army of Soviet Russia moved to Transcaucasia.
  On April 28, Soviet rule was established in Azerbaijan.
  Azerbaijan 362 HISTORY Sovietization created a new situation in the region.
  If before Armenia was in conflict with Musavat Azerbaijan, now being in conflict with Soviet Azerbaijan was the same as being in conflict with Soviet Russia.
 Armenian Consul in Vladikavkaz Hakob Sarikyan recalls that before the sovietization of Azerbaijan, the head of the North Caucasus Revolutionary Committee, Georgy Ordzhonikidze, told him that in order to be recognized by Soviet Russia, the Armenian government "must step out of its current position and enter into negotiations with Moscow."
  Գ. Orjonikidze's proposal after the unsuccessful attempt to inform the RA diplomatic representative in Georgia Tigran Bekzadyan, 1920 He will arrive in Yerevan on April 25.
  Here, during a meeting convened by the Armenian government with Sarikyan, it was decided to form a delegation to normalize relations with Soviet Russia, headed by L. Shant [3, N 72].
  The latter later recalled that he was opposed to the appointment due to his inexperience in the diplomatic field, but agreed at the urging of members of the government [9, p. 30].
 On April 30 he left Yerevan and at the end of May arrived in Moscow. The delegation headed by Shant (members: Hambardzum Terteryan, Levon Zarafyan).
  The task of the delegation was to achieve the recognition of Armenia's independence by accepting Karabakh and Zangezur within the borders of Armenia, Soviet Russia should at least in principle accept the annexation of Western Armenian lands to Armenia, etc. [14, pp. 479-480].
 L. On behalf of Soviet Russia, the People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs Georgy Chicherin and his deputy, Levon Karakhan, an Armenian, took part in the talks with the delegation led by Shant.
  In parallel with the Armenian-Russian talks, talks were also held in Moscow between the Kemalist delegation headed by Bekir Sami Bey and the Soviet government.
  Shant opposed the idea of ​​negotiating with the Turks.
  The Soviet authorities 363 HISTORY tried to play the role of arbitrator in resolving the disputed Armenian-Turkish issues, but were unsuccessful.
  The Armenian-Russian talks that lasted for about two months in Moscow did not yield noticeable results and it was decided to continue the talks in Yerevan [15; 4, pp. 54–95; 2, pp. 47–75; 16, p. 190-196].
 Turkish-Azerbaijani cooperation has played a role in the failure of the Armenian-Russian talks and the failure to achieve noticeable success.
  Their anti-Armenian activities were encouraged especially by Joseph Stalin, the People's Commissar of the USSR.
  1920 On July 8, G. In an urgent telegram sent to Ordzhonikidze (the latter played an important role in Bolshevik Eastern policy), he wrote: "My opinion is this. We should not maneuver to the end, we should support one of the parties, in this case, of course, Azerbaijan and Turkey.
  I talked to Lenin, he does not object "29 [21, p. 1].
  The next day, on July 9, G. Chicherin G. He wrote to Ordzhonikidze that they had repeatedly stated that not giving Karabakh and Zangezur to Azerbaijan would lead to the dissolution of Soviet power in Baku [18, p. 52].
  This is where the roots of the failure of the Armenian-Russian talks are hidden.
 While the Armenian delegation headed by Shant was on its way to Moscow, in 1920 On May 7, 1945, a Georgian-Russian treaty was signed in Tbilissi (Georgia) recognizing Georgia's independence and territorial integrity.
  According to the Georgians, the Russians recognized Lori, Akhalkalaki and Zakatala belonging to Georgia, which caused the dissatisfaction of the Armenian government. The newly appointed Prime Minister Hamazasp Ohanjanyan even sent a note of protest to the governments of Georgia and Soviet Russia, claiming that those regions were considered disputable [11, pp. 323-324].
 Thank you historian R. V. Ghazanjyan for providing us with these and other archival documents in time.
  By the way, "Ether" weekly in 2006 In the September 4-10 issue I. This idea of ​​Stalin was mistakenly attributed to G. Orjonikidze.
 364 HISTORY Boris Legrand was appointed Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Soviet Russia to negotiate in Yerevan.
  However, the Armenian government did not allow him to arrive in Yerevan, citing the fact that Shant's delegation was still in Moscow (the latter left Moscow only on August 11).
  That is why the Armenian-Russian negotiations were held in Tbilissi (Georgia), where in 1920 On August 6, RA delegates Arshak Jamalyan and Artashes Babalyan arrived.
 By an agreement signed on August 10, Soviet Russia recognized Armenia's independence.
  The Republic of Armenia agreed for the Russian troops to temporarily occupy Karabakh, Zangezur and Nakhichevan, which were considered "disputable" [7, pp. 248-249].
  The Armenian leadership had to sign this agreement because the country was in danger of a devastating Armenian-Russian war.
  An interesting fact: months after the signing of the agreement, in 1920. On November 1, at the sitting of the Parliament of Armenia, Prime Minister H. Ohanjanyan called this act a ceasefire [6, p. 533].
 As a result of the Russian-Turkish negotiations in Moscow in 1920 On August 24, 1945, the draft Russian-Turkish agreement was initialed, by which the USSR recognized the Turkish national covenant, the two sides would take the necessary measures to ensure continuous communication between Russia and Turkey as soon as possible, etc. [2, pp. 141-142].
  This Soviet-Turkish agreement, as well as the 1920 The thoughts and decisions made during the first congress of the peoples of the East in Baku on September 1-7, 1945, as well as the de facto incompetence of the Western powers, led the Kemalists to believe that the best time was to invade Armenia and force it to renounce the Treaty of Sevres.
  1920 On September 28, 1945, without declaring war on Armenia, the Turks quickly succeeded [5, pp. 3-26].
 This invasion was beneficial to Soviet Russia in that, using the Turkish threat, it would establish 365 HISTORIES in Armenia under Soviet rule.
  In connection with the Turkish attack on Armenia, G. Chicherin on October 2 V. Lenin writes that the Turkish attack aims to get in touch with them, then expressing hope that the attack "will make the ARF more concessive" [19, p. 158].
  In another letter to Lenin on October 5, G. Chicherin writes: "Recently, Armenia has become more of a weapon of the Entente offensive policy" [20, p. 1].
  An interesting fact: the RA government B. Legrand's delegation was invited to Yerevan on September 19, but Legrand arrived only on October 11, when it became known that the Armenians were losing to Turkish troops on the front and offered to renounce the Treaty of Sevres (this was also the demand of the Turks) [4, p. 201 ].
 It is difficult to see only coincidence here.
 The Armenian-Russian talks that resumed on October 12 in Yerevan, during which the Armenian delegation was headed by Levon Shant, ended on October 28 with the signing of a draft Armenian-Russian reconciliation agreement, which many researchers mistakenly call a 1982 agreement. R. was finally rejected. V. By Ghazanjyan [17, p. 38-46].
 According to the draft, the USSR recognized the independence of the Republic of Armenia and refused to interfere in the internal affairs, accepted the fairness of the annexation of the territories of Western Armenia, the border between Armenia and Soviet Azerbaijan would be determined He considered all the provinces and districts of Yerevan province and Kars region, except Nakhichevan province, as well as the southern part of Ghazakh province of Elizavetpol province, with the cities of Caravansara and Dilijan, to be part of Armenia. It was later that this or that territory of the former Caucasus viceroy became part of Armenia, etc. [7, pp. 316-320].
  The signing of this document aroused the excitement of 366 HISTORIES.
  1925 On May 20, S. In the letter addressed to Vratsyan, L. Shant recalls that the two delegations even had a party together on the successful completion of the work [14, p. 646].
 According to the draft contract B. Legrand left for Baku to get the consent of the Russian and Azerbaijani governments.
  However, Legrand did not agree with the Baku authorities on the provisions of the agreement he had initialed, that is why on November 4, the draft agreement was rejected in Baku.
  I., who was in Baku at that time, was also against the project. Stalin.
  Although Legrand complained, his opinion was ignored [2, pp. 235–236].
 B. Two days after the signing of the agreement with Legrand, on October 30, the Turks captured the impregnable Kars almost without a fight, which had a decisive impact on the outcome of the war.
 After that, almost simultaneously, the governments of Yerevan and Ankara approached each other with a proposal to sign a ceasefire and start peace talks [1, p. 6].
  A delegation headed by former Prime Minister Alexander Khatisyan was sent to Alexandropol to hold talks with the Turks.
  At the same time, negotiations were underway in Yerevan. With Legrand, who arrived with the mission of peacefully sovietizing Armenia.
  On November 23, Prime Minister Hamo Ohanjanyan resigned.
  The government of the new Prime Minister Simon Vratsyan had a heavy responsibility and the last government of the First Republic was lucky.
 On November 29, when B. Legrand was negotiating with S. Together with the Georgian government, accompanied by the military units of the Soviet Red Army, the Revolutionary Committee of Armenia headed by Sargis Kasyan entered the territory of the Republic of Armenia from the north-east and declared the country a "socialist Soviet republic" [10, pp. 1-5].
 In the difficult conditions created, the government of the Republic of Armenia and the ARF faction of the parliament had to hand over power to the Bolsheviks.
  On the afternoon of December 2, Ministers Drastamat Kanayan and Hambardzum Terteryan, authorized by the Government of the Republic of Armenia, met with the Plenipotentiary Representative of the USSR B. They signed an agreement with Legrand, according to which Armenia was declared an "independent socialist republic", members of the ARF and other socialist parties were not to be persecuted for their activities before the sovietization, etc. [7, pp. 383-384].
  With this, the Republic of Armenia gave way to Soviet Armenia.
  After two and a half years of existence in difficult domestic and foreign policy conditions, Armenia lost its independence, becoming part of the "big Soviet family".
 In the days of the sovietization of Armenia, among other intellectuals L. Shant was also in Yerevan.
  First of all, the figures who carried out anti-Soviet activities left the territory of the republic or went underground.
 The Soviet authorities in Armenia not only did not fulfill their obligations under the Yerevan Agreement, but in the following weeks began to carry out large-scale violence.
  L. did not stay away from that either. Shant, whose living room was also confiscated.
  Shant had to temporarily stay in Nikol Aghbalyan's apartment, where he was arrested [9, p. 32].
  1921 On the night of February 9 and 10, the Extraordinary Commission of Armenia arrested 88 "counter-revolutionaries" in Yerevan. The name of Levon Shant was mentioned first in the list prepared in advance.
  The reason for the arrests was the information received in the Czech Republic that some "enemies" of the Soviet system were going to flee the city at night [13, pp. 206-212].
 However, these preventive steps could not prevent the popular unrest.
  On February 16, the anti-Soviet uprising began under the leadership of ARF figures.
  On February 18, the rebels captured the capital Yerevan.
  L. was also released from prison. Shant.
  The rebel rule lasted until April 2, after which Levon Shant passed through Zangezur to Persia with many ARF figures and masses [9, pp. 33-34].
  This ended the period of his activity in Armenia.
 Thus, as the Deputy Speaker of the Armenian Parliament, the head of the Armenian delegation negotiating with Soviet Russia, Levon Shant brought his participation to the establishment and strengthening of the independent statehood of the republic.
  Accordingly, it is not accidental that his pen was more passive during this period.
  The famous writer had almost no free time for creative activity.
 .
