An organization is made up of individuals, so both their behavior and their relationships affect other levels of organizational behavior, be it group behavior, leadership, or corporate culture.
  That is, knowledge of the characteristics of individual behavior is an important tool that helps the manager to understand how people express themselves and how they relate to other people.
  The starting point for the study of individual behavior in an organization is the individual who, by interacting with other individuals in the organization, also influences how individuals perceive themselves and, consequently, the extent to which individuals become in the organization.
  For example, individual differences can lead to animosity between individuals, which will prevent the formation of effective teams, while the right combination of different personalities will contribute to the formation of such teams.
  In this respect, a key factor is how individuals perceive themselves in the organization.
  This is especially true of self-esteem and self-efficacy.
 Self-esteem is the evaluation of an individual, his merits.
 This, in fact, reflects how well the individual feels in the organization.
  It is obvious that if a person has high self-esteem, he is more self-confident, although there is always a risk of exaggeration of self-esteem, when personal perception of one's own merits does not coincide with the organization's perception of those merits.
  However, with positive self-esteem, an individual can take a positive position in the organization, and this will affect his motivation, attendance and ability to cope with stress.
  Low self-esteem is a more serious problem for the organization, which can lead to a negative perception of issues related to the organization and the importance of the role of the individual for the organization.
 Self-efficacy is related to self-esteem, as it refers to the individual's perception of the ability to perform the task.
  Thus, as we see, perception is a very important factor in the display of individual behavior, both within the organization and outside it.
 As we know, people perceive the world around them through 5 senses: taste, smell, sight, hearing and touch.
  The latter have physical limitations that protect against over-information.
 Perception is an epistemological process by which an individual recognizes the environment, interprets the situation in a specific way, and develops responsive behavior (see Figure 1).
 4 ECONOMICS Perception (Latin: perceptio - perception) is a process of receiving and transforming information that helps a person to understand reality and orient themselves in different situations.
  Through perception, a person gives importance to the elements and phenomena of the environment.
  The perceived world is the emotional reflection of reality.
  It should be noted that a special role in perception is played by the desire to perceive this or that stimulus, the awareness of the need to perceive it.
  The stimulus is any event, object, image, concept, everything that interacts with a person in such a way that his behavior changes significantly. External environment. Internal environment. Value orientation. The main variables influencing individual behavior [1, p. 36] The main features of perception are [2, p. 31]. Այն Subjectivity. The ability to reflect real-life objects and phenomena in the form of specific objects.
 Moreover, objectivity is not an innate feature of perception.
  The origin and improvement of the latter takes place in ontogeny, starting from the first year of a person's life.
  Form 5 ECONOMICS is based on movements that ensure the connection of the subject, communication with the child.
  Such movements are the movements of the hands when touching objects, watching the eyes with the eyes, hearing a sound or smelling, we make orienting movements towards the source of the stimulus.
  But they are often not realized by man.
 The essence of structuralism is that the phenomena and objects encountered in real life reach our consciousness through perception in a complete and systematic way, for example, a person listening to music understands the melody, that is, its semantic structure, and not the individual notes sounded at that moment.
 Activity means that at a certain moment a person is focused on one stimulus or group of stimuli, while other objects of real life are not important in consciousness.
 Aperceptivity means that perception depends not only on the nature of the external stimulus, but also on the subject itself.
  This means that the previous experience and knowledge of a person have a great influence on perception.
  This is why the same subject is perceived differently by different people.
 Situational influence is the reaction of people to external stimuli, depending on their nature.
  The main task here is to distinguish essential situational signals from non-essential ones.
 Wisdom is closely related to human thinking and language.
 Stability is the relative stability of certain features of an object when conditions of perception change.
  This property is manifested to a certain extent in the case of visual perception of the shape, size, color, size of the object.
 6 ECONOMICS There is a functional similarity between all the features of perception.
  If perception did not have such properties, our ability to adapt to the environment would be incomparably lower.
  Such an organization of perception allows for an adequate relationship with the environment.
  Peculiarities of perception are not innate and develop during a person's life.
 Perception largely depends on the characteristics of the person.
  A person's knowledge, interests, attitudes, emotions affect the objective reality.
  Because people differ in their individuality, it can be said that there are individual differences in perception.
  This is due to the way people select and organize emotionally perceived information.
 The perception process is influenced by a number of external and internal factors.
  External factors are related to the senses, and internal factors are related to the perceiving person.
 External factors include the following factors influencing the choice:  Size. The bigger the external factor, the easier it is to perceive.
  Movement. A moving body is more likely to be perceived quickly.
  Tension (intensity), such as bright light, loud sound, etc.  Contrast, opposing factors are more perceptible, for example, the height of a person of average height is more pronounced next to a short person.
  Repetition. The constant repetition of the same factor leads to its faster perception, for example, the advertisement, where the main idea is constantly repeated, and the advertisement itself, which is repeated regularly.
  Being new and recognizable. New or well-known phenomena attract attention faster.
 7 ECONOMICS The internal factors of perception are: perceptual (emotional) expectations, needs and motivation, goals and objectives, knowledge, personal characteristics, self-concept, emotional state, life experience and professional experience.
 Perceptual expectations are based on the past experience of similar situations.
  This is the position of perception, in which case a person sees, hears what he wants or what he has expectations.
 Demands and motivation play an important role in the process of perception.
  People notice the emotional elements that will satisfy their needs.
  For example, a hungry person is more sensitive to food than a non-hungry person.
 Motivation plays an important role in determining a person's priorities, for example, in times of crisis and possible layoffs, employees will be more sensitive to job announcements than in the normal course of the organization.
 Personal traits affect the way people perceive each other and other things.
  For example, optimists view things positively and pessimists view them negatively.
  Realists treat the world around them more or less objectively.
  People who perceive themselves realistically are well aware of their advantages and disadvantages, they are able to act effectively without feeling overwhelmed by their own mistakes.
 The self-concept is the self-determination of each person.
  It is formed during communication with other people and shows how we receive information about the environment and ourselves.
  The self-concept changes with age and under the influence of a number of situational factors, which are: [3, c. 88] շակ Culture. The individualized cultures of the West nurture a sense of an independent, individual Self.
  Collective culture of Asian countries 8 ECONOMICS The piles cultivate a sense of interconnected, "socially dependent" "I".
 Փորձ Personal experience. The effectiveness of one's own activity arises from mastering on the basis of experience.
  The successful solution of a problem that requires great effort gives birth to a sense of competence.
  Other people's judgments. We value ourselves in part because of what other people think of us.
  Children who are perceived as talented, kind, helpful, hardworking people strive to incorporate and maintain these qualities in their Self-Concept and Behavior.
 Երը The roles we play. When a person starts to play a new role (student, employee, parent, etc.), he / she feels uncomfortable from the beginning and is perceived as a role.
  Over time, it penetrates into the "I" and becomes a reality, ացում Self-justification and self-perception. Sometimes we feel uncomfortable when we are not honest or support ideas that we are almost unaware of.
  In such cases, we try to justify ourselves by identifying with that person.
 Ալական Social comparison. People are always trying to understand how they differ from the people around them, for example, as the only woman in the group of men, in the only team with higher education.
  In this way people realize their peculiarity.
  Comparison with the environment also leads to the classification of any group of people: rich, poor, witty, not witty, tall, short, and so on.
 We use our "I" as a basis for perception, for example, if a person perceives himself as weak, helpless, incompetent, then the world around him will seem threatening.
  Therefore, he is unlikely to take any risks and try to capture the environment.
  If a person perceives himself as a knowledgeable, capable person, he will set goals and achieve them.
  This is called self-esteem or self-esteem.
 Attribution is of great importance in the process of perception.
  It shows how people explain the reasons for their own behavior and the behavior of others.
 When the reasons for a person's behavior are not known, then attribution is used as a means of explaining the behavior.
 Attribution is the process of perceiving the causes and consequences of behavior, which allows people to make sense of the environment.
  Reasons for behavior are usually explained by individual characteristics, the situation in which the behavior was manifested, or both.
 Dispositional (individual, internal) attributes emphasize certain personality traits, such as abilities, skills, or intrinsic motivation.
 Situational attribution emphasizes the influence of the external environment on people's behavior, such as being late for work due to traffic jams.
 To understand the behavior attributed to the person or the situation, H. Kelly suggested the following three types of attribution: 1. Personal (the cause is attributed to the person performing the action), 2. Objective (the cause is attributed to the object to which the action is directed), 3. Situational (the cause is attributed to the situation).
 H. The results of Kelly's study showed that the participant of the event most often uses situational attribution, and the outside observer - individual.
 When studying attribution, Kelly suggests using the following criteria: 1. Consent. Would most people say or do the same in a given situation? If so, we are less inclined to explain our behavior in terms of personal characteristics (for example, low product quality).
 2. The unusual. Is the behavior unusual or not typical of the person? If so, is it a situational factor?
  However, if a person often behaves in that way, we are more inclined to individual attribution.
 3. Continuity. Is the manifestation of such behavior continuous, if it is not continuous, we are prone to situational attribution?
 Prejudices in many people can lead to wrong conclusions.
  Attributive prejudice is the tendency to prefer one explanation of behavior to another.
  A fundamental error of attribution occurs when a person or situation is judged on the basis of limited information.
  People want to be appreciated for their good work and tend to deny responsibility for their failures at work.
  People remember their successes and try to forget the failures.
  People, as a rule, connect their problems with external factors and not with individual peculiarities.
  The conditions for the occurrence of a fundamental error of attribution are: [5, p. 56]  "False consent" is an overestimation of one's own behavior (feelings, beliefs, beliefs), which means that the person considers his / her point of view to be the only true one and everyone should agree with him / her, and any disagreement is attributed to personal characteristics ).
  "Unequal Opportunities". This means not taking into account the role of the other person.
  Each person plays many roles.
  Some of them allow a person to express himself more easily and show positive qualities.
  This mechanism operates in the process of supervised attribution.
 11 ECONOMICS  "More confidence in facts than in judgment."
  The first glance is always directed to the most obvious fact - the person, and the situation has yet to be clarified.
  "Ease of building false correlations".
  The essence of this is that a person voluntarily combines two accompanying individual characteristics.
  Most often, external traits and psychological traits are combined, for example, all obese people are kind, all blue-collar people are cunning, and so on.
 Thus, knowing the specifics of perception, the laws of attribution, and the basic attributive errors will help the manager to correctly understand the motives for his and his subordinates' behavior.
 .
