In the current conditions of disruption of natural ecosystems, in order to ensure the living conditions of the society, it is urgent to unconditionally preserve the still existing natural landscapes and ecosystems and the ecosystem services provided by them.
  Therefore, in the Republic of Armenia and in particular in the system of specially protected areas, the issue of providing ecosystem services is also important due to the fact that the uniqueness of each plant and animal species is conditioned not only by the gene pool, but also by their role in the ecosystem.
 Currently, specially protected areas are considered as sustainability and ecosystems. 92 GOVERNANCE Conservation and restoration zones - regional centers whose activities are aimed not only at preserving the natural resources, but also at improving the well-being of the local population, reducing poverty and sustainable development.
  This allows for the formation of a comprehensive ecosystem model of environmental perception, in which all functions are aimed at solving practical problems and are in line with the socio-economic conditions and needs of the country.
 The discovery of the benefits of ecosystem services in the system of specially protected areas can significantly contribute to the mitigation of disputes due to restrictions on nature use, creating opportunities for the population to use natural resources on a legal basis.
  Moreover, the benefits of ecosystem services in specially protected areas need to be fairly distributed in order to contribute to the improvement of the social situation of the communities.
  On the other hand, the establishment of benefit distribution and compensation mechanisms, as well as the identification of cost-benefit and benefit communities and individuals, is a rather difficult task that can only be addressed through in-depth research into ecosystem services.
  The services provided by ecosystems are mainly providing (food, clean water, fresh air, fuel, raw materials), regulatory (climate, prevention of natural disasters and epidemics, shelters, habitat, erosion prevention), cultural (aesthetic, religious, scientific, social and spiritual values, formation of traditions, recreational resources) and supporting (soil formation, photosynthesis, nitrogen, carbon, oxygen, water circulation) importance.
 Ecosystem services are of economic value and should be integrated into the overall economic system of the country.
  Compensation payments for their provision or maintenance are new approaches to conservation, which encourage the creation of additional financial flows for the conservation of landscapes and biodiversity.
  The formation of the compensation mechanism for ecosystem services should clearly indicate the type of ecosystem services, the amount of funds allocated to consumers by them, the legal and institutional basis, taking into account local specifics and socio-economic situation.
 Therefore, the long-term economic strategy of ecosystem services should be aimed at solving ecologically efficient, rational, socially just and economically profitable problems.
 Theoretically, the main financial sources for the conservation of ecosystem services in specially protected areas are public expenditures in the field of nature protection, funds of polluting organizations, donor organizations, nature use fees, landowners, sponsors, etc.
 Payments for ecosystem services can further form reproducible environmental funds, contributing to nature conservation, compensation funds, and the foundations of a green economy.
  The mentioned approaches are also in line with the 2013 budget of the Government of the Republic of Armenia. Protocol Decision No. 16 of April 25, 2006 "On Approval of the Concept for the Establishment of Innovative Financial and Economic Mechanisms in the Environmental Sector".
 There are national biodiversity strategy and action plans and preliminary sectoral strategies for biology and ecosystem services in Armenia.
  To date, however, they have not been able to meet the challenges posed by the conflicting interests of various sectors: forestry, pasture economy, agriculture, nature protection and tourism.
  At the same time, there is no coordination between different state and non-state actors and population groups (for example, shepherds and farmers).
  In addition, there is insufficient reliable data on various areas to support planning and decision-making processes.
 The complex importance of ecosystem services formed in specially protected areas, especially their provision of living conditions, does not yet have a specific economic assessment, which leads to the disruption of ecosystems and the impoverishment of biodiversity.
 At present, the methods of economic evaluation of ecosystem services are mostly used in the fields of mining, forest and water resources, as well as eco-tourism.
 Ecotourism is characterized by a relatively weak negative impact on the natural environment, being an effective means of promoting the dissemination of environmental knowledge and information, tensions and integration between environmental and socio-economic systems.
 It provides an additional inflow of funds for the management of specially protected areas and increases financial stability.
  At the same time, eco-tourism is an effective way for the local population to earn a stable income, increase their living standards, employment and participation in the management of specially protected areas.
 We accept the approach that ecosystem services are mandatory, irreplaceable and unfortunately poorly understood and, importantly, they have real value.
  And it is also clear that some people have to pay those expenses.
  However, payments must be made through a market mechanism and, most importantly, they must be economically sound.
  The problem is also complicated by the fact that market mechanisms are not always economically based.
 GOVERNANCE Therefore, the task of economics is to outline the unified frameworks that can adequately take into account the specifics.
  In particular, we have singled out: 1. Evaluation The best methods for evaluating ecosystem services should continue to be developed and their value determined at different levels.
  At the same time, we cannot wait for certainty and clarity to act.
  We must continue the process of improving the assessment smoothly, developing the circles that can use those assessments effectively.
 2. Interconnection Significant ecosystem services are co-production of products, products (or vice versa) and the specificity of each service varies from one system to another, from one place to another.
  However, we must consider the whole range of services and their interconnectedness characteristics in order to prevent the creation of false incentives and maximize the benefits to society.
 3. Coordination of scales (sizes) For the management of ecosystem services, spatial and temporary dimensions should be coordinated with ecosystem services.
  For this purpose, it is expedient to coordinate with short-term, medium-term activities with local, regional and global institutions.
  Their purpose should be to create a database of all links, taking into account the costs, benefits and outcomes of all stakeholders.
 4. Property rights The establishment of an appropriate ownership regime for ecosystem services is important from the point of view of efficient and fair payment of those services.
 However, given the nature of public goods and the uniqueness of a large number of ecosystem services, we can either apply the existing procedure to private property by changing the form of ownership, or develop a property right system that can be applied to ecosystem services without privatization.
  For example, the use of a common resource authorization management mechanism is one of the most effective ways to implement it in terms of shared resources.
 5. Distribution issues The redistribution of costs and benefits needs to be thoroughly and thoroughly considered.
  This system should be designed to include the underprivileged, as they are highly dependent on shared ecosystem services.
  In particular, rich countries should be protected from the problem of free entrants and instead pay for the services they receive from biodiversity and environmentally efficient ecosystems from less industrialized countries.
 6. Sustainable financing In order to ensure stability, investments can be attracted when paying producers to provide services and continuing to provide services, or when paying private landowners.
 7. Adaptability of management Given the fact that there is always considerable uncertainty in ecosystem services.
  This is due to some shortcomings in the areas of monitoring, costing and management.
  It is quite difficult, as it gathers the necessary information in a row, integrates it for study and improvement.
  To achieve this, it is necessary to assess the current level of impact and develop new systems for experimental management, through which it is possible to quantify all indicators more effectively.
 8. Politics and education One of the two key factors limiting the implementation of the ecosystem payment system is general education on how the system works and the availability of political will.
  These two limitations can be overcome with the help of purposeful educational and informational measures, clearly disseminating, informing the data of successes and failures, providing them to the society and relevant state structures.
 9. Participation All stakeholders (local, regional, global) should be involved in the development and implementation of the ecosystem payment mechanism.
  The full awareness of stakeholders and their participation will contribute to the stability of the recognition of the rules, which determine the appropriate responsibility and it can be effectively implemented.
 10. Policy Consistency The ecosystem services system is most effective when they form the agreed component of the unity of policy measures that is applicable from the point of view of system governance.
  They are less likely to work when other political tools present conflicting incentives.
  For example, subsidizing the use of water or energy, or when the legislation governing redistribution is not flexible.
 Thus, the short, principled approaches to ecosystem services were presented.
  Of course, there are other additional definitions, standards, which come from the peculiarities of the ecosystem services of the given country, region.
 .
