The antiquity of acquisition as one of the oldest institutions of property rights has not lost its relevance today, but has gained new content and significance, which is due to the fact that in the context of legislative reforms in Armenia, in the current conditions of market laws and property rights. The scientific-practical study of acquisition as a form of recognition of property rights in civil law is valued.
 According to Part 1 of Article 10 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, all forms of property are recognized and equally protected in the Republic of Armenia [1].
 222 JURISDICTION According to Part 1 of Article 60 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, everyone has the right to possess, use and dispose of legally acquired property at his own discretion [1].
 The rights of a person defined by Part 1 of Article 60 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia at his own discretion to possess, use, dispose of and bequeath the property enshrine all the powers constituting the content of the property right, which by law belong to the owner as the subjective property right borders.
 The indicated trinity of the powers of the owner has an important scientific-practical significance [2, p. 119].
 It ensures the complete sovereignty of the owner over the thing, his freedom and property.
  [2, p. 153 The implementation of the enshrined constitutional norms on the right to property is guaranteed not only by the above-mentioned articles, but also by other articles enshrined in the Constitution (see Articles 74, 76, 184 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, etc.).
  The relations related to the exercise of property rights have also been regulated by a number of other legal acts adopted in the Republic of Armenia [9, p. 360], which define the content of property rights, property rights subjects, permissible limits of property rights, conditions for exercising and protecting property rights. and the procedure, mechanisms for protecting the interests of other persons with property rights.
 The legal regulations on the statute of limitations as a basis for acquiring property rights have been included in the RA Civil Code.
  It provides for a number of possibilities for the recognition of property rights in respect of property, one of which is the statute of limitations on acquisition.
  It is the most effective way of recognizing the right of ownership over property.
 At present, the need for scientific and practical study of the institute of recognition of the right of ownership by force of acquisition, as well as the issue of analysis and regulation of its role and essence [3] is important in our jurisprudence.
 The institute of statute of limitations aims to give legal significance to the existing factual relations and to promote the stability of the civil circulation.
 According to Part 3 of Article 178 of the RA Civil Code, the right of ownership over the ownerless real estate can be acquired by virtue of the statute of limitations (Article 187).
  This norm does not apply to real estate, which is an unauthorized structure.
 According to Article 187 of the same Code: 1. A citizen or a legal entity who does not own real estate, but has owned it in good faith, openly and continuously for ten years, acquires the right of ownership over that property (statute of limitations).
 2. A person referring to the statute of limitations of possession may attach to his term of possession the time during which the property has been possessed by the person whose legal successor is himself.
 3. Prior to acquiring the right of ownership over the property by virtue of the statute of limitations, the person who owns the property has the right to protect it from third parties who are not the owners of the property and have no right of possession over it on other grounds provided by law or contract.
 JURISDICTION 4. The right of ownership over real estate arises from the moment of state registration of that right by the person who acquired the property by virtue of the statute of limitations. [7]
 It follows from the analysis of Part 1 of Article 187 of the RA Civil Code that in order to acquire the right of ownership by virtue of the statute of limitations, the simultaneous existence of a number of requisites is necessary.
  In particular: 1. Possession must be in good faith.
  The integrity of the possession is assessed when the property is transferred to the actual possession of the person.
  The property must be transferred to the actual possession of the person without any violence.
  The owner must have the conviction that he is acquiring the property on legal grounds.
  Possession should be based on a fact that can give the possessor sufficient grounds to assume that he will possess that property as property; 2. The de facto possessor must own the property as his own, ie the de facto possessor of the property must participate in the management of the property, take care of its preservation, as in the case of his own property.
  The person must own the property as well as his own in relations with third parties; 3. Possession must be 10 years and in a row.
  That is, the possession of property should not be interrupted for 10 years.
  Possession can be terminated either by the will of the possessor, when he renounces further possession of the property (the property falls out of his possession), or by actions of the property owner or other persons aimed at returning the property; 4. Possession must be public, ie the actual possessor must not possess the property in secret from third parties.
 It follows from the above that the statute of limitations for acquisition is a means of obtaining the right of ownership by one person by the expiration of a certain period provided by law and observing certain conditions, and for another to terminate that right.
  This institution allows for a gap between fact and law when the non-possessing owner is not interested in returning the property to the 225 JURISDICTION, overcoming the uncertainty in the field of property relations by recognizing the de facto possessor [3].
  The antiquity of the acquisition "has always been aimed at eliminating ambiguities in law" [10, p. 218].
 It is obvious from the content of the cited legal norms that in order to acquire the right of ownership over the real estate on the basis of the statute of limitations, it is required to have a conscientious, open, continuous, lasting possession of that property as one's own property.
 These preconditions preclude the possibility of acquiring another's property as property that the holder owns and uses, in particular on the basis of a lease, custody or other agreement, albeit in good faith, openly, continuously and long-term, but with an awareness of his contractual obligations. owning not as own property.
  It is called to protect the rights of the property owner in good faith.
  At the same time, let us note that the RA mouse. Article 187 of the Criminal Code does not impede the recognition and protection of property rights.
  It provides for the possibility of acquiring property ownership in good faith, openly and continuously by the property owner [6].
 However, it should be noted that it follows from the content of the RA Civil Code, as well as the precedent decisions of the RA Court of Cassation, that domestic legislation provides for the possibility of becoming an owner only by land, subsoil, isolated water bodies, forests, perennial seedlings. , underground and surface buildings, structures and property attached to the land, which is impossible to separate from the land without causing damage to that property or land or changing its significance, termination or further use for its intended purpose 226 JURISDICTION [7].
  Moreover, the nature of the listed objects is such that a person who is not the owner can own them, if the owner has renounced the right of ownership over them or has left the property without the intention to maintain the right of ownership over it or has lost interest in the property and does not want to return it.
  In other words, with the application of this institution, the right of ownership can arise both to the ownerless real estate and to the real estate, which belongs to another person with the right of ownership, but the owner shows indifferent attitude towards it within the period defined by law [8].
 Therefore, if the owner of the property has renounced his right or for a long time does not want to return the property to him, reconciled with its loss, in order to ensure clarity in civil relations, it is expedient to recognize the property as the property of the actual owner [10, p. Based on the above, we can state that the statute of limitations as a legal institution has a long history of development.
  It has been one of the ways of recognizing the right of ownership over property since ancient times, but as a result of the current legislative changes, certain components of the content of this institution have been changed.
 The antiquity of acquisition, as an ancient institution of property rights, has not only not lost its relevance today, but has gained new content and significance in civil law relations.
  At the same time, it should be noted that in legal practice, along with the legal content given to the legal norms regulating the institution of statute of limitations for the acquisition of the RA Civil Code, by legislation, our position stems from the legal regulations of Article 134 of the RA Civil Code.
 227 JURISDICTION Complete legal regulations are not provided for the full application of this institution, which are not in line with the constitutional guarantees of the exercise of property rights.
 It should be noted that the regulation of Article 187 of the RA Civil Code is mostly implemented by the logic of acquisition of movable property, which is already a problem in the case of real estate [11], and there are no legal regulations on recognition of property rights by virtue of statute of limitations. It can also lead to a situation where movable items may be left out of civil circulation.
  It should be noted that Russian scholars also emphasize the need to establish legal regulations for the acquisition of property rights on a disputed basis, and emphasize the experience of the Federal Republic of Germany, in particular Article 937 of the German Civil Code, which provides that the acquisition statute of limitations Ownership of movable property can be acquired [12s.173].
 The next issue concerns the RA city. day. The entities that have the opportunity to become owners on the basis of the statute of limitations of the acquis secured by Article 187, in particular, this article directly envisages only citizens and legal entities as objects, ignoring the state and communities.
  Agreeing with A. Hovhannisian's position that the lack of mention of the state and communities does not mean that the state and communities can not use such an opportunity, and Civil. day. The wording of Article 187 leads to the conclusion that the statute of limitations may be used by any entity, including the state and the community, to become the owner of real estate belonging to other entities, as well as to become the basis for ownership of real estate owned by other entities. 13, page 36].
  However, taking into account the fact that the clear lack of such legal regulation can be interpreted differently, even in the absence of clear legal regulations on landless property in our country, certain provisions were envisaged by the RA Government "Self-constructed buildings, structures, voluntary By the Resolution No. 422 of July 27, 2000 on the Registration of Owned (Abandoned) Real Estate, which regulated the relations on the registration of ownerless real estate, but there is no legal regulation for any entity without envisaging steps to make the registered property state or community property. The fact that the right of ownership arises from the moment of state registration is well-known.
 Such an omission may cause problems in terms of ensuring the stability of civil circulation. Therefore, we think it is necessary to fix the following regulations by domestic legislation. 1. It is necessary to envisage the possibility of recognizing the right of ownership over movable property by virtue of the statute of limitations for acquisition, 2. the possibility of becoming an owner on the basis of the statute of limitations for acquisition. day. Article 187 directly provides for citizens and legal entities, ignoring the fact that this state can also be used by the state and communities, therefore, from the point of view of ensuring the existence of civil circulation, it would be more expedient to provide the right to become an owner directly for the state and communities.
 In general, the mentioned legislative changes will ensure a fair balance between the interests of a person and the right to property and public interests, while ensuring the constitutional guarantees of the exercise of the right to property.
 .
