It is an undeniable truth that the driving force of any organization is the person working in that organization, on whose work both the success of the organization and the effectiveness of the management of the organization depend.
 Moreover, the image and reputation of the organization begins to be formed from the opinion of who the person working in the organization is and what his / her socio-cultural environment is like.
  In other words, the image of the organization is determined by the behavior of the people working in it, in the formation of which the managerial behavior of the organization plays an important role.
  Managerial behavior is also an important factor in the management system of the tax body.
  It depends on the model of managerial behavior, what is the image of the tax body in the "eyes" of taxpayers, which is the reason for their willingness to pay taxes.
 The study of the model of managerial behavior in the tax system of the Republic of Armenia and the introduction of an effective model is an important issue, as the image of the tax body depends on the model of behavior, and consequently the efficiency of tax collection functions.
  That is why the search for solutions to the problem is a priority, which is the reason for the urgency and urgency of the problem.
 It is clear that the secret of securing tax revenues is in the image of the tax body.
  An image that directly depends on the model of managerial behavior in the management system of the tax authority.
  And in order for the model of managerial behavior to be effective, which takes into account all the stereotypes of tax officials, it is necessary to carry out an objective and fair assessment of the functions of the tax authority.
  As a result of the evaluation of the functions, it will be possible to identify the shortcomings caused by their performance and to develop rules of conduct that will make the model of managerial behavior effective.
 In general, when saying managerial behavior, one must first understand the social norms formed in the organization, value orientations, moral views, social expectations and assessments, patterns and patterns of behavior, creative atmosphere, employee competencies, personal styles of the manager, etc.
  It is important for the working person to know what examples of socio-cultural behavior the organization puts forward by solving the alternative that is considered important for the employees of the organization: the person for the job or the work for the person.
  In the first case, the executor is important for the organization, and in the second case, the initiator.
  Depending on the alternatives that the organization chooses, it gets its appropriate manifestation in the implementation of their functions by the employees.
 In this context, if we consider the tax body, one of the most important missions of which is to ensure tax revenues, it becomes clear that its management behavior plays a decisive role in the management system of the tax body.
  The managerial behavior of the tax authority determines the role of the tax officer performing the function of tax collection, and therefore the efficiency of the work done by the latter.
  In particular, depending on whether the tax officer is considered an executor or an initiator, it finds its appropriate response both in the implementation of the functions of the tax officer and in the formation of the image of the tax authority.
  An image that primarily summarizes the taxpayers' perceptions of the tax authority and from which the taxpayer manifests his behavior and demonstrates appropriate tax discipline.
  This is an endless chain, the connecting link of which is the managerial behavior used in the management system of the tax body.
  That is why the tax body concerned with ensuring tax revenues should first of all pay attention to the model of managerial behavior.
 From the point of view of behavior, the rules of conduct of tax officers are formed in the tax system of the Republic of Armenia, which are approved by the decision of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia12.
  According to that decision, the rules of conduct are obligatory for the tax officers in the performance of their duties, they are called to guide the tax officers in their decision N 1624-N of the Government of the Republic of Armenia of October 10, 2002.
 125 MANAGEMENT, as well as information for taxpayers on what behavior should be expected from tax officials during their work.
  In particular, the above-mentioned decision defines the following rules of conduct of tax officers:  To show unconditional loyalty and devotion to the Republic of Armenia, to respect the state symbol of the Republic of Armenia (flag, coat of arms, anthem) and the state language.  comply with the requirements of the Constitution, laws and other legal acts of the Republic of Armenia. Չ not to publicly oppose the policy pursued by state bodies and officials. Մնալ refrain from actions that may hinder the work of a state body or discredit and discredit the latter or the rating of the tax service, the title and reputation of the tax officer;  be guided by moral norms based on the principles of humanity, justice and honesty.  Respect human dignity, regardless of nationality, race, gender, language, religion, political or other views, social origin, official position, property or other status;  To be impartial, impartial, restrained and exemplary. Արկի not unnecessarily emphasize his official position. Չ Do not show cowardice or unnecessary sensitivity in non-standard or emergency situations, be balanced.  To be disciplined, punctual, to put the interests of the society and the state above the personal ones, to be completely devoted to work. Նպաստ Contribute to the formation and maintenance of the public belief and belief that the tax service is based on the idea of ​​impartiality, honesty and efficiency.  Be polite to taxpayers, partners, subordinates and management.  Avoid any kind of sponsorship, mediation, support, advice; as a result of which the fulfillment of the requirements of the tax legislation may be hindered, to use only moral means during the service to achieve the goal; Չ Do not make yourself dependent on any person by your behavior. Ել to avoid unnecessary promises, to realize the value and importance of his word, the possible negative consequences of the given promise.  Ensure the protection of human and civil rights and legitimate interests. Ներում Within the limits of its competence and in the manner prescribed by the legislation of the Republic of Armenia, to timely and properly examine the proposals, applications and complaints of the taxpayers (citizens); Կազմակերպ Organize the reception of citizens within its competence and provide the necessary information, give instructions and clarifications.
 The above rules of conduct of the tax officer, which seems perfect at first glance, do not complete the managerial behavior of the tax authority and do not give a clear idea of ​​the model of managerial behavior of the tax authority.
 First of all, despite the fact that these rules of conduct are published on the official website of the tax authority, it is safe to say that many taxpayers in 127 GOVERNMENTS are less informed about the rules of conduct.
  This is mainly explained by the fact that the majority of taxpayers registered in the Republic of Armenia are small and medium taxpayers who are not interested in the rules of conduct of a tax officer at all.
  From this point of view, it is a fact that taxpayers' perceptions of the image of the tax authority are not based on the above-mentioned rules of conduct, especially when very often the established rules of conduct do not correspond to reality.
 Second, the above-mentioned rules of conduct for tax officials are more restraining mechanisms through which the tax authority establishes strict technical control over tax officials.
  As a result, the tax officer is automatically promoted to an executor, whose requirements and strict rules of conduct force the employee to formalize both the performance of the functions and the results of the work resulting from the performance of the functions.
  In general, in the current situation, the tax officer, as an executor, develops a behavior that distorts the image of the tax authority as a result of the taxpayer-tax officer relationship.
  As a result, the taxpayer prefers to stay in the shadows, especially when there are misinterpretations and loopholes in the legislation.
 Third, the above rules of conduct of tax officials do not give an idea of ​​the stereotypes of people working in the tax system.
  In particular, the rules of conduct of the tax officer have nothing to do with the 4 main stereotypes of managerial behavior: economic-human, technical-human, psychological-human and moral-human.
 Moreover, there is no clearly defined model of managerial behavior in the management system of the tax authority, which would set norms of behavior for different stereotypes of people working in that system.
 The economic-human stereotype is the manifestation of human behavior, which is closely connected with economic interests.
  In other words, the behavior of people in wages, economic 128 MANAGEMENT in the presence of other motives and interests, through which people are determined to work.
 However, as wages are relatively low in the tax system, the reward system is disproportionate, on the one hand, the lack of a fair and objective system for assessing the functions of tax officials, on the other hand, additional and unpredictable costs incurred by tax officials weaken the role of economic stereotype. .
  As a result, the willingness to do the work decreases. "There is no economic interest, there is no willingness to do the work."
  Therefore, in these conditions, it is pointless to even talk about labor productivity and management efficiency.
  The mood of work decreases even more, especially as a result of tightening the rules of behavior within the framework of the technical-human stereotype.
  Undoubtedly, the above-mentioned rules of conduct of the tax officer are tools of technical control, to which are added the strict control over the performance of the work, the requirement to submit the work in the defined ways and terms, the penalties for the work not done.
  In this case, especially taking into account the fact that shortcomings in work are inevitable, and the employee may be subject to disciplinary action for the defect, in which case the employee may be deprived of economic incentive for months, it can be clearly argued that the mood towards work decreases. has a tendency.
  Moreover, in such a situation, the behavior of the tax officer is completely transferred to the pressing sector, which is full of psychological problems, the most striking manifestation of which is that the tax officer becomes a "performing robot" who can be rewarded for good work.
  In this case, the psychological-human and moral-human stereotypes are completely ignored, as there are no norms of behavior that will take into account the psychology of the tax officer and the values ​​of moral management.
  Especially, except in very few special cases, there are no standards and rules of conduct that will create a field of despair for tax officials and allow them to use the moral-human stereotype to act as an initiator.
  Proof of this is the existence of a number of subdivisions in the management system of the tax authority, such as the Department of Internal Security, the Department of Internal Audit, the Department of Organization and Supervision.
  This proves that the work of the tax officer is so unreliable that several subdivisions control his work.
  Therefore, it is unnecessary to talk about the initiative of the tax officer.
  As a result, the tax officer has no choice but to act as an executor.
  In this case, very often the tax officer, obsessed with ensuring labor indicators, automatically behaves in a way that is not only not aimed at reducing the shadow economy, but also creates preconditions for the growth of the shadow economy.
 The efficiency of the activity of any organization, as well as the tax body, is directly related to its image.
  That is why, emphasizing the role of managerial behavior in the formation of the image of the tax body, the behavioral model operating in the RA tax system has been studied.
  In particular, they studied the rules of conduct defined in the tax system of the Republic of Armenia and what impact those rules have on the formation of stereotypes of tax officials.
  And although the rules of conduct of the tax officer are defined in the tax system of the Republic of Armenia, the role of the model of managerial behavior is more or less neglected.
  Proof of this is the fact that the tax officer very often acts as an executor in the performance of his functions.
  In such conditions, as a result, the implementation of tax collection functions is often formalized, instead of qualitative results, quantitative indicators are important, and the efficiency of activities is reduced.
 .
