The free management of a person's life is considered a component of the right to life.
  Restriction of the right to life due to the fact that a person is seriously ill is called Euthanasia 1.
  The term "euthanasia" was first used by Francis Bacon in the 16th century to mean "good death."
  Some scientists find that: "The right to die is the same natural right as the right to life, and euthanasia should be considered a form of exercise of the human right to die." 210.].
  "The right to die is the absolute, natural, inseparable right of a person protected by law to terminate his life by his own will.
  He has the right to decide for himself the methods of restricting life. [2] [p. 16].
 Sigmund Freud performed euthanasia on September 23, 1939, in his London apartment with the help of Dr. Shur, in order not to suffer from cancer pain.
  In the United States in 1989-1998, Dr. Jack Gevorgyan used his "meritron" device (a device that injects a lethal amount of poison) to help 130 people to end their lives.
  Euthanasia is now legal in a number of European countries, particularly the Benelux countries, Switzerland, and in France, Italy, and the United Kingdom, people who are terminally ill are allowed to refuse treatment.
 There are two types of euthanasia: passive and active.
  Passive is when the terminally ill patient is deliberately stopped or the life support device is turned off.
  It is considered active to inject a deadly drug into the patient or other actions that cause death, as a result of which there is a sudden and rapid death.
 There are also voluntary and involuntary types of euthanasia.
  Voluntary euthanasia is performed with the patient's consent or with a pre-arranged legal agreement (provided in case of irreversible coma).
  The word no euthanasia is Greek and means good death, the practice of depriving a person of life when he is terminally ill. 207 JURISDICTION Voluntary euthanasia is performed regardless of the patient's will if he is unconscious and unable to express his will.
 2002 In one of its judgments, the ECtHR argued that the plaintiff's assertion that the right to life included the right to die was that Article 2 of the Convention stated that the State's obligation to protect life did not apply to decisions to manage one's own life and that Article 2 could not interpret the distortions in such a way as to confer a diametrically opposite right to die.
 Studying the practice of the CE member states, Georg Puppink 3 noted that some states do not observe the ban on euthanasia and even allow the use of euthanasia.
  According to Puppink, many countries want to force the ECHR to recognize the "right to die" or the "right to commit suicide."
  As early as 2011, the ECtHR authorized euthanasia and suicide4 and argued that it stemmed from a person's right to privacy protected by Article 8 of the Convention.
  In particular, he mentioned that a person can decide for himself how and at what moment his life will end, if he is able to make such a decision independently5.
  However, this only referred to the case when the patient was able to express his opinion on that issue.
 Then in 2012 The ECtHR's position has changed, with the study of the following two cases, Koch v. Germany and Gross v. Switzerland, 6 showing that the problem of euthanasia has not exhausted itself and needs to be re-examined.
  Private ECHR, Pretty v. United Kingdom [Pretty v. the United Kingdom] (No. 2346/02), 29 April 2002, the Plaintiff was suffering from a fatal motor-neurone degenerative disease that paralyzed him below the neck.
  She wanted her husband to help her commit suicide.
 The director of the European Center for Law and Justice, Strasbourg Hass v. Switzerland, has been suffering from biopolar mental illness for 20 years and has attempted suicide twice.
  He considered that his illness needed a long treatment and ruled out a dignified life.
 19.07.2012 Koch v. Germany, complaint 497/09 and 14.03.2013. Like Gross v. Switzerland 208 JURISDICTION, in the case of Koch v. The United Kingdom, the court refused to grant the applicants permission to assist in suicide7, and in the case of Gross v. Switzerland, on the contrary, permitted the use of euthanasia even when he was not ill.
  Both cases relate to the case when orphans want the state's support in depriving them of their lives.
 2012 year. On January 25, 1859, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted Resolution 1859, entitled "Protection of human rights and dignity, taking into account the wishes of the patient", which stated that euthanasia was a premeditated murder of a disabled person. idle 9.
  This was already progress, as the PACE instructions before that forbade helping the incurable patient to commit suicide10.
 Already in 2013 The ECtHR examined another case 11 which referred to the lack of clear principles in Swiss law to determine whether euthanasia was possible and under what circumstances, when the applicant was not terminally ill but tired of life.
 Studies have shown that most of the 47 PACE and Council of Europe member states initially condemned euthanasia, and only the Benelux countries and SchweCoch were paralyzed and wanted a husband from doctors.
 He took a deadly medicine and was refused.
  Madame Koch and her husband did not get a solution to the problem and left for Sweden in Germany, where they organized her suicide.
 Madame Gross is experiencing a natural aging process, but she has no strength to resist.
  He wants the doctors to give him a deadly medicine, and he thinks that it comes from his right to dignity and the state is obliged to provide him with all the conditions for suicide and he passed away and died safely.
 25.01. 2012 year. PACE Recommendation 1859 PACE Recommendation 1418 (1999) on the protection of human rights and the dignity of the terminally ill Gross v. Switzerland 209 JURISDICTION has adopted and implemented it, but recently many countries have advocated euthanasia.
 2002 On April 1, the first time in the world, the Netherlands passed a law on euthanasia, which states that euthanasia can be used on patients over 12 years of age, only at their request and only in the case of incurable diseases when the pain is unbearable and unbearable.
  Such a diagnosis of the patient must be confirmed by at least two doctors.
  2018 In the Netherlands, Aurelia Brauwars died of euthanasia. She was not terminally ill, mentally ill, but died of her own free will.
 Belgium was the second country in the world in 2002. In September 2007, a law was passed [8] according to which a person can be deprived of life by medical intervention only if he suffers from unbearable physical and psychological pain.
  The patient must be an adult and the decision made by him / her must be voluntary, written and well thought out.
 2009 In March 1945, euthanasia was legalized in Luxembourg, [10] according to which doctors who perform euthanasia on terminally ill patients could not be prosecuted or prosecuted in court.
 2014 The Belgian parliament passed a law on pediatric euthanasia, [4] which stated that if a child had an incurable disease and was in pain, he could be euthanized.
  With the passage of this law, Belgium became the first country in the world to abolish the age limit for euthanasia.
 One of the supporters of euthanasia in the United States is Jack Gevorgyan, who died in 1989. He developed a special device to help those who could not commit suicide on their own but wanted to commit suicide.
  He intervened in the lives of more than 130 people, for which in 1991. He wrote to him before his death. "I was 29 years old and she voluntarily decided to leave life. Я 210 LEGAL SCIENCE was deprived of the right to work as a doctor, and in 2000 she was sentenced to 25 years in prison, in 2007 [11] she was released due to ill health, and in 2011 she died [12].
  2001 The US Attorney General issued an order according to which all the doctors who help people commit suicide will be convicted in accordance with the Criminal Code.
  2006 The US Supreme Court declared that order illegal.
  In recent years, attempts have been made in the United States to legalize euthanasia.
  Passive euthanasia has been widely used in the state of California since 1976 after the decision of the US Supreme Court.
  1977 The referendum passed a law on the human right to die.
  Euthanasia was legalized in the United States in 1998. Oregon, and in 2009 In the states of Washington.
  In both cases, the decisions were taken by referendum.
 In Switzerland, euthanasia is banned, but doctors can help patients, who can give the terminally ill a deadly drug that the patient must inject himself.
  It is possible to help not only the citizens of Switzerland, but also those who are on tour13.
  The reason for the absence of the law on euthanasia in this country is that everyone has the right to life and everyone can decide how to die and the state can not intervene in this matter.
  There are many euthanasia organizations in Switzerland that "help" people, notably Dignitas and Exit.
  2011 Residents of the canton of Zurich voted in favor of legalizing euthanasia.
  Passive euthanasia has become widely used in many cantons in Switzerland, where it is not a help to the patient to die but to help him live, they can ask for the life support equipment to be turned off.
 In France, there is also a law that prevents the patient from dying.
  2014 French High Court 211 JURISDICTION color administrative court permitted medical euthanasia in 2006. In Israel, a law was passed that allowed terminally ill patients to refrain from using equipment, ie passive euthanasia, and active euthanasia was banned.
  The patient may refuse electroshock, oxygen mask, any type of resuscitation, but either he can say it simply, if it is impossible to say it simply, he must have written in advance about having such a wish or such a wish must be expressed by the relatives he had previously asked for.
 2010 The Swedish Ministry of Health stated that the patient could refuse resuscitation equipment.
  Swedish doctors could turn off the equipment only at the patient's will, because according to the Swedish interpretation, the right to refuse further medical care is the patient's right and doctors must take into account the patient's wishes.
 2010 The Court of Appeal of the Federal Republic of Germany ruled that disconnection of life support equipment for terminally ill patients was not a crime if committed at the patient's request.
  This does not apply to active euthanasia, which is still a crime in Germany and carries a maximum sentence of up to five years in prison.
 2011 on the health care of Russian citizens in Russia The law prohibits both active and passive euthanasia.
 Now let's refer to the approach existing in the Republic of Armenia.
  According to Article 23 of the RA Law on Medical Care and Services of the Population, 40-year-old Vincent Lamber was in a coma for 7 years after a motorcycle accident.
  The Supreme Administrative Court of France allowed the equipment to be disconnected, after which the ECHR upheld the decision of the French court.
  "He's not enjoying life at all," said his wife, who wanted the equipment turned off.
 212 JURISDICTION was violated on 06.10.15 by HO-113-N. "Euthanasia is prohibited in the Republic of Armenia, accelerating the death of a patient by any action and means.
 Persons who consciously incite a patient to euthanasia or perform it shall bear responsibility in the manner prescribed by the legislation of the Republic of Armenia. ”
 So far, the RA Criminal Code has not referred to the term euthanasia in any way, the logic of the Code shows that it was considered a simple murder.
  According to Article 62 1 1 5 5 only, committing a crime as a result of a combination of serious circumstances of life or with compassion is considered a mitigating circumstance.
  Now a new draft of the RA Criminal Code is posted on the e-draft.am website, according to which Article 71, Part 6 of which also commits a crime with the motive of compassion is considered a mitigating circumstance.
  However, Article 162 of the draft stipulates that the crime should be authorized for murder at the request of the victim, according to which: "Murder of a person at his conscious and voluntary request to release him from physical suffering is punishable by imprisonment for a maximum of five years."
  It is obvious that the criminal code is taking slow steps to decriminalize euthanasia.
 According to Article 23 of the RA Law on Medical Care and Services to the Population, which was amended on 06.10.15 by HO-113-N. "Euthanasia is prohibited in the Republic of Armenia, accelerating the death of a patient by any action and means.
 Persons who consciously incite a patient to euthanasia or perform it shall bear responsibility in the manner prescribed by the legislation of the Republic of Armenia. ”
 The right of a person to die is not defined by law in Armenia, but the concept of the RA Law on Health Care is placed on the e-draft.am website [20], which stipulates that euthanasia is prohibited in the Republic.
  At the same time, the criteria or indicators are set, in case of which the resuscitation and artificial life support measures of the patient are terminated by a unilateral decision of the person performing activities in the field of health care and services.
  That is, in fact, only active euthanasia is prohibited, and passive euthanasia is allowed.
 We do not agree with these approaches and taking into account the case law of different countries, as well as the ECHR, and active euthanasia should be allowed in the Republic of Armenia in that area, clearly defining the criteria so that it does not lead to crime.
 .
