According to UNICEF, there are about 93 million SEN children worldwide.
  If 13% of non-SEN children do not attend school, then about 50% of SEN children.
  Thus, more children with SEN are deprived of the right to equal education.
 [1] Inclusive education is perhaps the most effective way to provide all children with equal access to education.
 Inclusive education presupposes the education of all children, both SEN and non-SEN, in the same school and class.
 455 TEACHING With the support of UNICEF, Armenia plans to transition to universal inclusive education by August 1, 2025, which is regulated by relevant laws.
 International: իրավունք Convention on the Rights of the Child 1989 [2] Մ UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 2006 [3] համաշխարհային The Universal Declaration of Education for All [4]  Salamanca Declaration 1994 [5] 1996 UNESCO Convention on Discrimination in Education 1996 [6] կայուն Sustainable Development Agenda until 2030 2015 [7] Local:  RA Constitution - Article 35 - Every citizen has the right to education [8]  RA Law on the Rights of the Child, Article 11 [9]  RA Law on Education, Article 19, point 3 [10] The general principles of inclusive education are as follows:  Inclusive education presupposes a system;
 2013 by the Center for Educational Research and Consulting During the first six months of the year, inclusive education was assessed in 34 sample inclusive schools operating in 5 target regions of the Republic of Armenia to find out how ready Armenia is for the transition to universal inclusive education.
  As a result of the evaluation, they came to the conclusion that the model of inclusive education in the Republic of Armenia with all its functions is more like integrated education.
  The work of the multidisciplinary team, as well as the multidisciplinary team with the parents and teachers was evaluated.
  The assessment team came to the conclusion that the results are not very satisfactory and thus Armenia is not ready to move to universal inclusive education.
  The assessment team also made recommendations for physical and logistical criteria, as well as for the rational assessment of children with SEN and control of the results.
  [13] Unfortunately, this assessment ignored the psychological factor of inclusive education.
 Now let's see what is happening in this direction in Armenia today.
 Comprehensive activities are already being carried out by the relevant structures with the direct participation of the KGMSN: adaptations to the environment, teaching trainings involving teachers, services provided by pedagogical-psychological centers.
  [14] In particular, in 2019. In September 2012, on the initiative of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Armenia and with the funding of the United Nations Children's Fund, the "Teach, Armenia" Educational Foundation implemented the "Development of Teachers' Inclusive Teaching Capacity" program.
  [15] The resulting 60 mentors provided training and mentoring assistance in Yerevan, Aragatsotn and Shirak marzes.
  The second stage of trainings has already started today.
  Trainings are provided in other regions by the Pedagogical 457 PEDAGOGY psychological support centers.
  A group of trainers and mentors work with teachers to teach a range of general inclusion issues, from assessing a child with a disability to methods and strategies for working with them.
  In other words, the process of equipping teachers with appropriate tools is underway and Armenia is making a step-by-step transition to the implementation of a universal inclusive education program.
  [12] However, the transfer of the SEN child from special school to secondary school in a new favorable educational environment and the appropriate methodology for teachers is no less important than the position of secondary school students, their parents and society at large, which of course has a direct impact on the success of the process. in case of unsuccessful implementation.
  In other words, inclusive education is considered to be only a professional issue, and all the preparatory work and discussions related to it are carried out exclusively among narrow specialists.
  [14] That is, the opinions of non-SEN children and their parents are ignored.
  In other words, the domain is ignored, starting with the community, ending with all the school staff, not the SEN children and their parents.
 The environment, of course, can contribute to the successful implementation of inclusive education policy.
 International experience shows that if no preparatory work is done with students' parents, it can hinder inclusion and hinder further normal work.
 Inclusive Education Professor Mara Sapon-Chevin asked teachers to use books written about SEN children during classes to educate non-SEN children by developing appropriate attitudes toward their classmates.
  One of the aims of the proposal was to reduce prejudices against children with SEN and to allow children with disabilities to enter school as full members of education.
  However, Sapon-Chevin's proposal did not receive much attention.
 The issue of inclusive education has preoccupied other professionals in the field, and experts Monson and Chartleff conducted a 1979 study of non-SEN children to see how their awareness of attitudes toward SEN children changes attitudes.
  Non-SEN children with children watched a film about a child with quadruple phocomelia (underdevelopment of the limbs when all four limbs are missing) and then had a class discussion with the specialists.
 As a result, more children from non-CBDU stated that they would like to have a friend with such problems than before watching and discussing the film.
  One year of monitoring showed that the result was maintained for one year.
  The result was also more significant in the classes where the teacher talked about the problems of children with physical disabilities.
  [11] As a result of this experience, it becomes clear that it is necessary to first compile relevant materials and to carry out informational and psychological preparatory work with non-SEN children before inclusive education.
 Studying the international experience, it becomes clear that before moving to inclusive education, it is necessary: ​​1. The professional team, using various methods and resources, to conduct awareness and psychological training  in all communities, not only teachers but also the entire school staff ների parents of the class included individually  not among SEN classmates.
 2. In the communities where inclusive education is already implemented, conduct research and appropriate improvement measures.
 459 PEDAGOGY 3. Review the content of education, textbooks and teaching aids, through which the transfer of knowledge, development of abilities and skills is carried out, which prepares the basis for the manifestation of appropriate attitudes and behaviors.
 4. Provide resources (books, films, brochures, videos) to schools to raise audience awareness and predisposition.
 5. Require reports on the mandatory use of resources and their effectiveness from their managers.
 The school, in particular the teachers working with it, the professional team and the classmates, should provide academic, physical, social and psychological support to the SEN student.
 The communication and support that the SEN child can receive from his / her peers and the world around him / her will create a healthy physical, mental and psychological environment for him / her, which will facilitate the inclusion.
 Thus, it is recommended to carry out the above-mentioned preparatory work before the transition to universal inclusive education, thus promoting effective inclusion.
 .
