Motivation is the driving force behind human behavior.
  Motivation of the employee by the employer presupposes the motivating factors that determine the behavior to motivate him to achieve the goals set before the organization.
 In order to comprehensively define the concept of motivation, it is necessary to study what depends on the motivational influence during a person's activity and how motivation is related to the results of a person's activity [1].
 The employees of the organization are the main source of its competitive advantage and the result of the organization's activity depends directly on them, but unfortunately not all employers realize their importance and as a result do not try to fully motivate their employees.
 In most organizations operating in Armenia today, the management does not apply a certain set of motivation forms to the employee. Emphasis is placed on one or two motivational factors that are not always sufficient to fully motivate the employee and serve him / her for the benefit of the company.
 One of the main reasons for incomplete use of motivational factors by employers in the Republic of Armenia are: Առանձնահատ Peculiarity of the structure of the labor market of the Republic of Armenia. Excess manpower and extremely high levels of unemployment allow employers to become more capricious when hiring employees, set higher standards for vacancies, set more job responsibilities than expected, and at the same time set low wages without using motivation. other forms.
 Ների Salaries by employers (especially small businesses) are already considered as a motivating factor for the employee.
  This can be mainly explained by the fact that the business environment is already not so favorable, due to which the level of profitability in many cases does not allow employees to use other forms of additional material motivation.
 Ոչ Lack of knowledge and incomplete information of employers can also be considered as a reason for lack of motivation.
 In many cases, managers do not attach much importance to motivation and because they do not have full understanding and sufficient knowledge about this powerful management tool.
 The list of reasons can be continued, but it should also be noted that we still have companies that have successfully introduced a set of motivational tools and in which the level of employee motivation is quite high.
  Such companies include mainly foreign-owned companies with their 134 MANAGEMENT staff management models.
  Their personnel management strategy is primarily aimed at achieving the main goals of the organization through effective and constructive cooperation between employees and managers.
  In organizations that believe in such values, people and their abilities are seen as the most valuable resource of the organization, and its management becomes a strategic priority.
  Human resource development becomes an investment rather than an expense item, as is the case with the traditional, highly hierarchical management model.
 An example of such an organization has come to our attention and has become an object of study.
  Ingo Armenia is one of the leaders in the insurance market.
 As a result of about 20 years of activity, the company occupies a unique place in the RA insurance market and is one of the market leaders.
  The company provides high quality insurance services to both individuals and legal entities, protecting them from various risks.
 "Ingo Armenia" company in 2012 It was recognized as the "Best Brand of the Year" by the results of the research conducted by the National Awards, and in 2015. It was awarded the "Mercury" prize of the Chamber of Industry of the Republic of Armenia as a "proportionately and steadily developing company" [2].
 The "Ingo Armenia" insurance motivation system was studied, a survey was conducted among the employees, the results of which are presented below. Գործ The practicality of the practical style of clothing.
 Արագ Technical service rapid response system.
 Լի Completeness of working conditions (modern equipment, security system, comfortable property, etc.).
  The newly hired employee is attached to the outlook system on the first working day, which is followed by a congratulatory message, where the employee is congratulated on becoming a member of the Ingo Armenia team.
  A guide to ethical norms and rules is also sent.
 ։ Individual approach to each employee.
  Year-end corporate event.
  End-of-year awards through a sample mechanism.
 Նվիր Dedication of non-standard semi-precious symbolic jewelry to female employees on the occasion of March 8.
 Դրական The positive moral and psychological atmosphere of the team.
 Վճար Payment of further tuition fees to employees holding responsible positions for a limited period of time as a team member.
 One of the factors weakening the motivation of the employees of "Ingo Armenia" company is the low salary.
 Some of the employees are greatly motivated by the staff, some by the discipline, and some by the work style of the head of the department.
 According to Frederick Herzberg's model, employee motivation is influenced by two groups of factors: hygienic and motivational.
  Absence or unnecessary level of hygienic factors can cause dissatisfaction, but their presence can not in itself cause a feeling of satisfaction and be a motive for a person.
  In contrast, the absence of motivational factors can not cause dissatisfaction with work, but its presence causes satisfaction and becomes a motive for effective work performance of the employee [3], [c 317].
 If we analyze the above-mentioned factors, taking into account Frederick Herzberg's model of motivational factors, it can be stated that the employer has put the emphasis on hygienic motivational factors, and at the same time we can say that looking at the salary as a hygienic factor in our example, However, the low salary has already weakened the motivation, which was pointed out by the employees.
  However, at the same time, factors that increase motivation were also pointed out.
  Here the psychological factor has its influence, the employees feel like members of the team and are satisfied with the working conditions.
 The management of the company did not neglect the evaluation of the results of the work, which is accompanied by bonuses, the possibility of professional advancement is also encouraged.
 In conclusion, it can be said that no matter how much the salary is considered as the main hygienic factor of motivation, it should be taken into account that the manager is not a philanthropist and can not minimize the workload and the salary to the maximum.
  However, the fact that the nature of the relations established in the team depends only on the leader is undeniable.
  Sincerity and simplicity, everyone's participation in decision-making are also important preconditions for achieving efficiency at work.
 .
