Traditionally, the formation of knowledge, and today, the formation of skills and abilities of graduates has been highlighted in professional educational programs.
  However, at the same time, no serious attention is paid to the management of the graduate's career.
  During his / her studies, the student mostly focuses on academic activities, not paying any attention to the design of his / her career after graduating from the university.
  On the other hand, the employer also tries not to interfere in the individual's education as much as possible, having a passive attitude towards the universities and waiting for the graduate to enter the labor market and then start working for him.
 The academic share of education is not considered predominant by the employer for the graduate.
  In addition to professional knowledge, the ability to be balanced, oriented, to behave appropriately in the work environment 101 to manage, to communicate, to make timely and sound decisions is extremely important.
  Therefore, currently the task of universities is to review the directions of educational services in order to strengthen the "employer-university" bridge, and to take into account the dynamic changes taking place in the labor market.
 One of the peculiarities of university education is the long-term study.
  During the training of a specialist with higher education for four to six years, significant changes take place in the labor market, and during the "entry-exit" period of the student university, the curricula "become obsolete".
  In such situations, the opportunity for university graduates to find work expands when universities use the "institution of guardians".
 The "Institute of Trustees" assumes the active activity of the employer in the university system, when from the second or third year of study the employer selects the best students from the university classrooms, provides them with nominal scholarships, even interferes in the curriculum reforms to follow the graduate whose professional skills and his abilities will become acceptable to him.
 In this regard, universities should be interested in the participation of employers in the field of education and be proactive in selecting the best students in their graduation courses to offer future jobs.
  The employer, being well aware of the process of training specialists, should take an active part not only in the improvement of curricula, but also ensure its "presence" in the field of educational services.
  Possible ways to implement it are the assignment of incentive scholarships to the best students by employers, the organization of internships, the support of the establishment of profile training studios and training centers in universities.
 102 GOVERNANCE On the other hand, employers are gradually realizing that it is more efficient to spend their share of resources on university education programs than to train recruited university graduates.
  Taking advantage of this situation, the doctoral graduate should work closely with employers with the aim of getting a job immediately after graduation.
 The master's degree graduate, still acting as a doctoral candidate, must be convinced that the profession will be in demand in the labor market.
  In this regard, at the current stage of the Bologna Process, significant attention is paid to the targeted learning outcomes of education, when education is fully addressed to the demands of the labor market.
 Studies show that in addition to economic crises, the lack of professional skills and abilities during training is one of the main reasons for the unemployment of graduates with higher education in the BKET area.
  In this regard, universities should strive to direct the learning outcomes as much as possible to the skills and abilities of the specialist that are required at higher levels of professional education.
 And the problem is not only that the graduate specialist may not have a comprehensive range of sufficient skills or abilities, and thus, not be required by the employer.
  In practice, there are many cases when the employer is not satisfied with the wide range of professional skills acquired during education, as it is "oversaturated" and is not applicable at work.
  And it turns out that in that case, the doctoral graduates are considered "highly qualified" by their employers and as a result do not go to work.
  Studies show that among 103 unemployed university graduates in Western Europe, the proportion of young professionals with "high qualifications" for an employer varies between 14-35%.
  [1] Interesting solutions are offered in Swedish universities in this regard.
  Thus, the doctoral program at the Royal Technological University of Stockholm is organized in two stages.
  Graduates of the first stage, who study for two years, receive the first degree degree of Doctor and can only work in research institutions serving the industrial market.
  However, if they want to teach and do research at universities, they have to study for a doctorate for another two years, defend a dissertation and have higher doctoral degrees.
 There is no such flexibility in the organization of labor market-oriented higher professional education in the Republic of Armenia.
  Moreover, according to official statistics, in recent years the highest number of unemployed are people with higher education (see Table 1), who have a high level of educational qualifications and the quality of their professional skills and abilities exceeds the level of employers' needs, and are rated "excellent" by the latter. , they just do not get a job offer.
 Table 1 Unemployed in Armenia by educational censorship (thousand people) [2] Education censorship Higher, postgraduate Male Intermediate Vocational Secondary Elementary 20.1 WOMEN In this regard, there is an opinion that despite some achievements of the Bologna process in Armenia, The reforms are still mainly related to the structural characteristics of higher education and, in general, have not yet addressed the content and quality of educational programs.
 They, in turn, lead to the fact that the education system, in general, still remains "disconnected" from the labor market and does not fully take into account the demands of employers.
  Vocational education programs are often oversaturated with subjects that are not directly related to the skills and abilities required of graduates, or do not include up-to-date subjects that would develop today's graduate competencies addressed to employer requirements.
 The importance of the human factor in the organization of the educational process is obvious.
  There are many examples when there is enough information, opportunities, but students and teachers do not use or do not want to use them.
  Therefore, universities should make an urgent transition to the organization of education based on the learning outcomes, clearly stating in the professional curriculum to what extent and how the subject relates to the formation of the graduate's professional abilities and skills.
 In this way, it will be possible to unload the curriculum from the "indirect" subjects that overload the curriculum, instead including new subjects with the final results that meet the demand of the labor market in the learning process.
  Targeting learning outcomes to the demands of the labor market will greatly increase the effectiveness of reforms in the vocational education system.
 An important indicator is also the duration of the graduate finding a job after graduation, which is an average of 4 months in BKET and has the following distribution by countries (Figure 1).
 105 GOVERNANCE Figure 1 Duration of graduates' employment after graduation (months) [4] In the Republic of Armenia, graduates of tertiary professional higher education mainly see their career growth in the university system, joining the ranks of university teaching staff.
  After defending their dissertations, a small number of them continue their career growth in research institutions or government agencies.
 The reason is that the difference in salary between educational censors is not so significant in our country yet, and people with academic titles prefer teaching.
 However, in the international market, graduate doctors do not shy away from working in the industrial market, as employers value their professional leadership skills there.
 As for the bachelor graduates of RA universities, during their studies they have almost no connection with the problems of career design and after graduation they face the difficulties of finding a job.
 In this regard, we attach importance to the activities of career centers not only in the organization of internships or the provision of feedback to graduates, but also in the field of providing labor market awareness to students during their studies.
 Today, the universities that are able to succeed in the employment of graduates by their intervention are becoming competitive in the educational market.
  And that success is not only due to the provision of high quality knowledge and work skills, but is significantly correlated with the successful management of the graduate career design process.
  Therefore, we consider important the activities of the student career development management system in universities, in which the relevant departments will participate in the joint activities (see Figure 2).
 Figure 2. Establishment of a graduate career design management system.
  1 Career Center Alumni Association Alumni Career Design Chairs Employers Indicators of effective performance of a student's career design system, in this case, may be the graduation rate of the graduate's work.
 107 MANAGEMENT The share of graduates working in science, the share of unemployed graduates, the share of graduates cooperating with the university.
 .
