One of the most important levers influencing the investment processes in the economy is the state investment policy, which predetermines the main directions and conditions of their regulation, as well as the promotion of investment flows.
  It is obvious that through an effective investment policy it is possible to create a favorable investment environment, which is one of the important preconditions for the development of 77 economies and sustainable growth in any country.
  However, at the same time, it should be noted that the absolute growth of investments alone will not solve the problems of economic stability and long-term development, employment, income leveling, human capital development, environmental protection, natural resource reproduction, as well as other important and promising issues for the economy. .
  The effective solution of the latter largely depends on ensuring the inclusion of economic growth.
 According to the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), "Inclusive growth is economic growth that is equitably distributed in society and creates opportunities for all."
  It can also be characterized as a process of growth, during which the participants in economic relations are given equal opportunities, as a result of which everyone benefits.
 Important components of inclusive growth are investments in human capital (education, healthcare), job creation, progressive tax policy, social protection, elimination of discrimination and participation in the economy, formation of strong economic institutions.
  According to the World Economic Forum 2018 Inclusive Development Index, the country with the most inclusive economy in the world is Norway, followed by Iceland, Luxembourg, Switzerland and Denmark.
  As for Armenia, it is the 45th among 74 countries in the list of developing countries.
  At the same time, Armenia lags behind its neighbors Georgia, Azerbaijan, Turkey and Iran in this index.
 The above, of course, is conditioned by the peculiarities of economic relations and investment policy formed in Armenia since the formation of the newly independent state, which were not aimed at the strategic development of the economy and ensuring inclusion.
  As in the past, so now the main part of the financial resources entering the Armenian economy is directed to the implementation of urgent state expenditures, including the service of foreign debt.
  In Armenia, the state has been and continues to be an institution that supports the population, allocating insufficient funds to meet current social needs and pay the salaries of many civil servants at different levels.
  In fact, such a situation is inherited from the former Soviet era, which satisfies both the ruling elite and the vast majority of the population.
  Probably, as a result, the lion's share of the funds under the management of the country is not invested in the development of the economy and is not reproduced.
  Moreover, the existing financial means of the state are not enough even to invest in the development of the social sphere itself, in particular for the formation of modern objects of healthcare, education, science and culture.
  And this is in the case when the population of Armenia tends to gradually decrease.
 Although Armenia was considered one of the most advanced republics of the USSR in terms of scientific research and innovation, since independence the state has not provided sufficient conditions for the effective activity of scientists.
  The brain drain deprives our republic of the most valuable and difficult national asset.
  It is obvious that science in Armenia cannot develop only due to international aid or regular charity of Diaspora representatives. Long-term and large-scale investments are needed, not the allocation of funds on a residual basis.
  Moreover, in the conditions of economic expansion, science cannot develop in isolation. It is also necessary to fully integrate into the network of world scientific institutions.
 Referring to the investment policy formed in Armenia, it should be noted that after gaining independence, the Republic of Armenia began to form appropriate institutions typical of a liberal economic system, adopting the so-called "open door policy" of attracting foreign investment.
  In that context, a number of reforms were carried out to ensure the conditions for doing business and the formation of economic infrastructure.
  In 1994, the RA Supreme Council adopted the RA Law on Foreign Investments [1], which, of course, had a positive impact on attracting investments to the Armenian economy in the following years.
  The latter was also facilitated by the growth of the world economy since the 2000s and the large inflows of remittances from abroad, due to which the volume of private investment in Armenia increased significantly in the pre-crisis sector, especially in the field of housing construction.
 However, in 2008 the negative effects of the global financial and economic crisis spread to various sectors of the Armenian economy, which led to a significant reduction in investment flows, which, in turn, negatively affected the economic growth and socio-economic development of the country.
  According to Professor Rochester University M. Aguirre and his partner at Harvard University G. According to Gopinat's recent 79 studies, fluctuations in economic growth in developed and developing countries are very different [6], so the factors causing the economic crisis and its effects may also differ significantly in individual countries.
  In particular, the main reason for the relatively deeper decline in Armenia was the structural features of the economic growth registered in Armenia since 2000. The high economic growth in 2000-2008 was the result of unprecedented growth in the non-export sector and especially in the construction sector, which was the result of a sharp increase in capital inflows to Armenia and the concentration of these funds in the construction sector.
  As of 2008, the share of investments and national savings in GDP increased to 43% and 32%, respectively, but during the crisis this figure fell sharply in GDP due mainly to the decline in private remittances, and national savings fell sharply. [5] .
  It should be noted that the construction sector accounted for about 10.5 percentage points of the 14.1% decline recorded in 2009. [7]
 Although Armenia managed to overcome the main effects of the crisis, in the post-crisis sector both the volume of investments and the economic growth rates were not restored.
 In fact, during the World Financial and Economic Crisis and in the period that followed, the trend of slowing economic growth in Armenia was of a stable long-term nature, being the result of the long-term impact of objective factors.
 In the conditions of the non-inclusive model of public administration formed in Armenia, the unstable economic growth registered in the economy has actually deepened the income gap in the society, especially in the post-crisis period.
  It should be noted that the Gini coefficient, which is a statistical indicator of the stratification of society and shows the degree of inequality in income distribution, is one of the highest in our country among the countries with a comparable level of development.
  Moreover, according to the World Bank, the Gini coefficient in Armenia in 2009-2018 It has had a steady growth trend (29.6% in 2009, 36% in 2018).
  For comparison, in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, the Gini coefficient ranges from 0.25 to 0.45.
  The above, of course, testifies to the fact that the economic growth of Armenia during the past years has not been inclusive.
 In order to achieve high inclusive economic growth in Armenia, it is very important to attract both domestic and foreign investments in the required volume, 80 which, as a result of targeted investment policy, will ensure a proper level of economic inclusion.
  Based on the above, long-term investments are especially important for the development of the economy of the Republic of Armenia, as short-term investments are mainly aimed at solving strategic problems at the economic level, and the need to solve long-term strategic problems presupposes long-term investments, which in turn lead to them. The need to analyze the sources of formation, efficiency of use, return and other issues.
 In this regard, it should be noted that the investment policy pursued by the Armenian government in recent years has not been strategic, has not been systemic and has been dictated by situational solutions, without sound economic assessments.
  In particular, in 2015, the Government of the Republic of Armenia approved the "Concept of Investment Policy of the Republic of Armenia", the main purpose of which was to describe the investment environment of the country, define the main goals of state policy in the investment sphere and outline the necessary measures and directions.
  Although the adoption of this concept was a serious step towards the implementation of investment reforms in our country, in order to implement the measures reflected in it, it is necessary to carry out serious reforms both in the legislative field regulating investments and in key areas of government economic policy.
  Assessing the state macroeconomic policy implemented in Armenia in recent years, it can be noted that it did not proceed mainly from the principles and approaches enshrined in the investment policy concept approved by the Government of the Republic of Armenia, ie did not provide favorable business conditions and attractive investment environment.
 This is evidenced by the following negative phenomena in the economy, which have a direct negative impact on the development of the investment climate and investment activities, in particular, the high level of economic uncertainty, imperfect competition, shadow economy, low level of effective cooperation between science and economy. Lack of investment-promoting and economically justified privileges, lack of active state-business cooperation, low quality of protection of property rights and investors' interests, low level of human capital development, deepening inequality of incomes of the population, etc.
 The political changes that took place in Armenia in April 2018 were a turning point for the launch of large-scale reforms in the economy.
  According to the program of the Government of the Republic of Armenia approved in 2019, the main feature of the forthcoming economic policy will be the promotion of inclusive economic growth, which envisages the state providing appropriate conditions in the economic field to form a gross national product and involve the maximum number of people in economic activity.
  We believe that for the urgent solution of the above-mentioned problems it is necessary to thoroughly review the main directions of the state investment policy implemented in the Republic of Armenia.
  Considering the improvement of the investment environment as one of the main priorities of the country's economic progress, we consider it necessary to develop and purposefully implement measures that will contribute to the formation of a favorable investment environment by reducing risks and providing additional economic and administrative incentives for investment.
  In order to stimulate long-term investments in Armenia, it is necessary to ensure an open and liberal economy with high efficiency of state administration.
 At present, for Armenia, the technological development of the priority sectors of the economy and the growth of human capital must be important solutions to the problems of investment promotion and ensuring the sustainable development of the economy.
  Based on the above, it is necessary to create appropriate conditions for the development of an inclusive model of economic development, for which, first of all, the Armenian economy must ensure sustainable indicators of economic development.
  For that purpose, it is necessary to make full use of the main factors of potential growth of the Armenian economy that have not been put into operation before.
  Clear strategies should be defined for all directions of macroeconomic policy in Armenia, setting as a priority goal the long-term sustainable development of the country's economy and inclusive growth based on the promotion of local and foreign investments.
 Based on the above, the main directions of the investment policy aimed at inclusive economic growth in Armenia should be: Legal protection of property and investments, guaranteeing favorable, competitive, non-discriminatory and predictable conditions for all participants in investment relations; encouragement of investments in small and medium enterprises, development of collective investment institutions, development of human capital, including increase of labor quality and productivity, promotion of innovations and development of knowledge-based productions, energy saving,
 The urgent solution of the above-mentioned problems requires scientifically substantiated and systemic reforms in the direction of developing the institutions of the market economic system, improving the legislative field and defining new principles and approaches of investment policy.
 Thus, one of the most important preconditions for sustainable and long-term economic growth is the inclusion of economic growth, and in this regard, the direction of public investment policy plays an important role, through which it is possible to direct both foreign and domestic investment flows to strategic, knowledge-based and resource-saving sectors. Development in turn will stimulate the progressive development of the economy.
 .
