There are many definitions of "service" in the literature, but not one definition has been adopted by everyone.
 Philip Kotler defines the service as follows: "Service is any event or result that one party can offer to the other and which is basically intangible and does not lead to the possession of anything.
  Services can be produced or provided ”[1; 78].
 Services can be given five characteristics that need to be taken into account when implementing marketing programs.
  Let us list these features and give an explanation of each of them [2; 89-99].  Intangibility,։ Inseparability from service source,։ Quality variability, 70 MANAGEMENT  Longevity, բաց Lack of ownership.
 1. Intangibility.
  The services are intangible.
 They cannot be seen, tasted or heard until they are purchased.
  In order to strengthen the customer's trust, the service provider can start and offer a number of additional services.
  First of all, he can increase the tangibility of his product, describe his service, sharpen the customer's attention to other benefits related to the service.
  In addition, in order to increase the level of consumer confidence, the service provider must choose a quality name that corresponds to the essence of the service.
 2. Inseparability from the source.
  Services are inseparable from their source, ie the service is both provided and consumed at the same time, whether it is provided by a person or a car.
  For most products, these two processes are usually independent.
  In other words, most of the services can not be saved for further use. The buyer must be present at the creation of the service.
 3. Quality variability, instability.
  One of the characteristic features of services is the variability of service quality.
  This means that the quality of the service depends mainly on who provides the service, when, where and how.
  Most of the services are provided by people, that is why the buyer and the person providing the service have to interact and cooperate.
 The result depends on their joint actions and the buyer's perception.
 4. It is a non-storage product.
  Most of the services, depending on the fact that they are provided and consumed at the same time, are not stored.
  The service may not be retained for further sale or use.
  That is, the service is consumed at a predetermined moment and it is not changed by the influence of any factor.
 MANAGEMENT 5. Lack of ownership.
  The provision of a service is a transaction in which one party provides the other with a good that is not subject to ownership but is valuable to the buyer for one reason or another.
  Occasionally there is an exchange of proprietary items during the service, for example, software can be purchased electronically.
  The essence of this characteristic is that in the case of most services, the acquisition of the service by the consumer does not imply the acquisition of ownership of it.
 Table 1. Main Differences and Characteristics of Goods and Services 8 Goods Tangible Visible Preserved Goods trade is not accompanied by their production Export of goods means removal of goods from the customs territory of the country for a fee Services Not tangible Not visible Not safe Accompanied by their production or delivery Export of services means its delivery to a foreigner, not a resident, even if he / she is in the customs territory of the country. Marketing specialists face challenges such as ծառայությունների understanding customers' needs and requirements for services  service make it clear to the consumerThe table was developed by the author.
 72 MANAGEMENT  keep the promises made to the consumer and deal with them.
 Thus, in the field of services, marketing is carried out in three stages: internal marketing, external marketing and two-way or interactive marketing (triangular sides), which is schematically triangular (Figure 1).
  The three vertices of the service marketing triangle represent the organization's management, employees, consumers or customers.
 1. The organization makes promises to consumers, 2. Employees keep their promises, 3. The relationship between the management of the organization and the employees to the right relationship, as well as educated, friendly and qualified employees make it possible to keep the promises made to consumers.
 The connection between the organization and its customers is called the external marketing process.
  During external marketing, the organization makes promises to consumers about the services it provides in terms of offers and their implementation [3; 24-30].
 Management External Marketing Promising Definition Internal Marketing Fulfilling Promises Employees Interactive Marketing Keeping Promises Consumers Figure 1. Services Marketing Triangle 73 MANAGEMENT Promises are made about certain services or ads, and customers are close to certain expectations.
  They can have a positive or negative impact on consumer expectations, differences between expectations (expected, potential level) on the quality of customer service and the actual, current level of service quality.
  Consumers use price as an indicator of service quality, while promises of service availability and availability have an impact on consumer expectations.
 For service providers, factors such as service providers, the organization's image, visible structures, and the actual service process form the basis of customer service and delivery expectations.
  After comparing the expectations of the customers and the reality, the final opinion of the consumer towards the service is formed through the environment where they receive that service, as well as through the characters and behavior of the people who provide those services.
 Internal marketing is the training of employees who communicate directly with customers and increase efficiency, as well as the training of the entire staff to work together and ensure customer satisfaction.
  Internal marketing means that service companies need to pay more attention to the quality of staff.
 He must effectively train employees who work with customers, work together and meet the needs of the consumer.
  If the organization aims to provide the highest quality service, then each employee must be consumer-oriented.
 In fact, internal marketing should precede external marketing.
  In this context, the motivation of employees and a positive relationship with the top management are also very important. 74 MANAGEMENT, the moral and psychological environment and the values ​​that employees carry as a link representing the organization.
  It makes no sense to advertise the highest quality until the staff has achieved its implementation and maintenance.
 The interactive, two-way marketing process assumes that the organization keeps its promises to consumers.
  Interactive marketing is the real communication between service providers and consumers, which is called "truth moment" or service process, situation.
  This is a crucial moment in the service delivery process, where organizations show that they can meet consumer expectations.
  Interactive marketing plays a very important role in building relationships between the organization and consumers.
  Perception of the service by the consumer stems from its provision, which can not be separated from communication with employees (the service is inseparable from its source).
  It is important for the organization that the relationship between the organization and the consumer is not so important as between the employee and the consumer.
  The success of this relationship depends on the employee's attitude towards his work and his commitment to the organization.
  The organization is obliged to hire employees with high service skills and involve them in the activities of the organization, motivate them to follow the examples of the organization's management.
 During communication, the employee and the consumer meet face to face, and the behavior of the employees is a very important factor that influences the expectations of the consumer.
 Two-way marketing assumes that the quality of service largely depends on the relationship between supplier and consumer.
  This means that professionals should not assume that they have met the needs of the customer by offering only a high-quality service, but are also obliged to develop mutual marketing skills and functions in its 75 MANAGEMENT.
 A marketing mix is ​​a set of marketing tools that a supplier uses in the target market to solve marketing problems.
 Economist J. McCartin presents the marketing mix with 4p complex: 1. product - product, 2. price - price, 3. place - distribution or sale, 4. Promotion - promotion [4; 15].
 And Philip Kotler presents the marketing mix with 6P, adds another 2P to the above 4P: political power (political power) and public attitude (public option) [5; 1981 Booms and Beatles proposed the 7P complex for the service sector: 4P added people, process, and Physical Evidence [6]: 1. product / service - product / service, 2. price - price, 3. promotion - promotion, 4. place - distribution or sale, 5. people - people, 6. processes - processes, 7. physical evidence - physical environment.
 Service offer. The product is what the organization offers to the consumer, which can meet his needs.
  It can be tangible or intangible.
  In contrast, service-supply decisions offered by service marketing professionals differ from product-based decisions.
  The analysis of the provision of the service shows that it can be divided into separate components, in particular, the main offer, which represents the main non-material benefits of the service, and the secondary offer, which represents the tangible and additional elements of the service.
  The provision of the main services offered is developed in the form and place preferred by the customer, emphasizing the customer's expectations regarding the service.
  The provision of secondary services is an additional benefit, an advantage offered to meet the additional needs of consumers, and serves to differentiate it from competitors.
  These benefits may include material and non-material elements of the service, which help the consumer to easily understand the main service.
  Services are difficult to control and present to the consumer because they are intangible.
  Therefore, marketing professionals often emphasize the tangible elements of service delivery.
  The less tangible the service, the more material evidence is needed, including packaging, brand name, corporate image, service delivery, and service personnel.
 Pricing of services. In determining the price of a service, service marketing professionals are more concerned with pricing issues than product marketing professionals.
  The difference is that the intangible characteristics of the service indicate that the price becomes a determinant of quality.
  The service deprivation profile makes it important to monitor the supply and demand of services.
  Changing the price component is the easiest and usually the fastest.
  The cost of providing services is often used by consumers to shape their expectations, make purchasing decisions, and evaluate the quality of service provided.
  It is seen as an essential dictum in the field of services with high risk and peculiarities of experience in order to form expectations about the service.
  Price is a quality indicator for the consumer.
  Thus, an opinion has been formed that the higher the price of the given service, the higher the consumer's expectations towards it.
 GOVERNANCE The pricing factors in the services sector are as diverse and almost the same as in the pricing of goods.
  Thus, these factors include costs, competitive prices, target groups and positioning chosen by the organization, pricing strategy, discount systems and seasonality.
 Promotion policy. In classical marketing, the mix of promotion is divided into 4 main groups: advertising, sales promotion, public relations (PR) and personal selling.
  However, when promoting services, it is important to emphasize the tangible elements of the service, such as packaging, service delivery mechanisms, and service personnel.
  In this context, one must be able to turn the invisible into visible values, and the risks into advantages.
 The main tasks of promoting service marketing are:  To ensure awareness and interest in the organization and the services provided,, To convey and present the benefits of the service purchased,  To create a positive image or reputation of the organization,  Distinguish the organization from competitors,  Remind consumers about the existence of the service.
 The choice and types of communication channels depend on the target groups and the chosen position.
 Distribution of services. Distribution decisions relate to the availability and affordability of services to consumers.
  From a consumer perspective, accessibility means that they can get the service whenever they want, and accessibility is the relative ease, ease with which consumers can get the service offered by service providers.
  In the case of clean services, 78 MANAGEMENT Distribution decisions are not very important, although most services include a tangible, tangible component.
  As a result, distribution decisions include decisions about the physical environment and the provision of services by intermediaries.
  At the same time, in some cases, the "geographical location" of the service is also important.
  For example, the location of the hotel, the availability of infrastructure, in many cases the geographical location also depends on the position of the organization, for example, if the service company wants to be positioned as a top organization and targets its target groups in more purchasing segments, it must be located in a suitable place, such as the city center or the rich.
 People. People, as an element of the service complex, include all human players: the organization's staff (internal consumer), buyers (external consumer) and other consumers who play a role in the service delivery and selection process.
  The staff of the organization is in constant interaction with the customer in the process of providing services, as a result of which it can be said that the skills, knowledge, attitude and behavior of the staff affect the perception of services and their quality by consumers.
  Consumers often identify the organization's staff with services, regardless of the role or influence of staff in the service delivery process.
  It is here that it is important to consider the external and interactive marketing processes of the marketing triangle of the above services (Figure 1).
 In fact, it presupposes the selection of the "right people / managers" by the "right people / service staff" and the continuous development of their skills and knowledge (Figure 2).
 79 MANAGEMENT Attitude Judgments Abilities Knowledge Figure 2. Stages of staff knowledge and skills development 9 Processes. Processes are the current procedures, mechanisms and activities of various nature through which services are provided.
  In case the service delivery process is standardized or customized, the service is considered as quality by the customer.
  Of course, the main components of the service delivery process are the people who are directly involved in that process.
  For this reason, the service is an ongoing process of "assimilation" of the organization's employees and external consumers.
  The provision of services and its consumption takes place at the same time, and due to that, consumers become participants in the process of providing services.
 Consumer loyalty and trust in the organization greatly depends on the success of service delivery processes.
 The marketing and other functional units of the organization should work together to be able to best identify the needs of internal and external consumers. The diagram was developed by the author.
 GOVERNANTS, satisfy them by developing and offering efficient and consumer-centric service delivery processes (Figure 3).
 Development of Consumer Expectation System Modification of Expectations Features Development and implementation of processes according to defined characteristics Definition of staff behavior Performance evaluation and implementation of development measures Figure 3. Stages of customer needs identification and service delivery process 10 Physical environment. The environment in which the service provider delivers the service and where the organization and consumers interact (as well as any tangible component that facilitates service delivery) is called the physical environment.
  Service providers should provide, offer material evidence of service in order to shape and develop the image of service to real and potential consumers.
  Often the physical environment coincides with the promotion and distribution of the service.
  All tangible evidence of services, such as booklets, forms, business cards, report formats, equipment, and physical facilities (e.g., hotel room comfort, cleanliness, etc.), represent the physical environment of the service.
 The diagram was developed by the author.
 GOVERNANCE Thus, the additional 3 Ps of service marketing reflect the key features of services, in particular, the inseparability of service providers from consumers, the simultaneous nature of consumption and delivery, and the need to transform invisible and intangible factors into tangible and visible factors.
  The 7 Ps of summary services marketing with their elements can be presented through the diagram below (Figure 4) [7; 15].
 .
