The article discusses the psychological features of fire-rescue training and issues related to strategic approaches to the study of adaptation patterns.
 One of the tasks set out in our ongoing research is to create a comprehensive formula for firefighter adaptation components to be used in a variety of professional fields.
 The urgency and urgency of the issue raised in this article is dictated by the implementation of the mentioned problem.
 It is obvious that emergency situations are inevitable phenomena accompanying the history of the society.
  The current stage of society's development is not free from various disasters, accompanying and subsequent emergencies, which make the further course of human life unpredictable.
  Dealing with such situations requires a modern approach.
 Emergency and crisis law are very relevant for today's society, as in order to organize effective work in any emergency situation, it is necessary to have a wealth of sociological, socio-psychological, socio-economic and other knowledge-based knowledge, which can be used to know about emergencies. the peculiarities of the mental manifestations appearing in the fire-rescuers at that time, to assess their level of readiness to act correctly, and so on.
 Managing the rescuer motivation system by its 10 PSYCHOLOGIES or from outside (special psychologist, manager, etc.) can give a stress-regulating effect within certain limits of stress.
  [1; 68] The aim of our research is to reveal the peculiarities of psychological training and stress resistance of fire-rescuers in emergency and crisis situations.
 The research part was carried out by us with the fire-rescuers of the fire-rescue detachments of the RA Ministry of Emergency Situations.
 For the purpose of conducting the research, the following methods of assessment of independent experts were used: observation, conversation, survey, and the following test methods: Methodology for diagnosing the risk of maladaptation and neuropsychological stability in Holmes Stress "2." T. Methods for detecting Holmes and Rahe stress and social adaptation. on the basis of which the individual and group psychological characteristics of the fire-rescuers were compiled.
 As a result of the conducted researches, a number of patterns have been revealed, which, by their nature, shed light on the process of revealing the psycho-physiological mechanisms of the problem of a person's mental work capacity.
 Thus, the analysis of the research results shows that mental performance is based on the manifestations of strong types of temperament, the peculiarities of their nervous processes (although the nature of the rescuer's activity itself requires strong types).
  On the other hand, during the activity, the rescuers gain a great deal of experience in self-government and activation of mobilization opportunities in difficult situations.
 11 PSYCHOLOGY In addition, the rescue operation itself has not yet been fully studied, it is not yet clear what is the mechanism by which the rescuer uses his mental powers, when he demonstrates useful, effective actions, what is the possibility of his backup, what is his crisis situation? the limit of functional possibilities.
  Moreover, the results of the research show that the activities of rescuers are based on the expression of motivations due to the fact that they are in the primary and secondary service.
 The observations were of a long-term nature, which can also be called longitudinal observations, as it was made over a long period of time (months and years).
  It presupposes constant communication between the researcher and the object of research.
 Young people (20-35 years old) are mainly motivated by self-affirmation, gaining more confidence by their leaders, the elderly (36-50 years old) staying in the service, not leaving it (the desire not to be unemployed).
 Thus, referring to the test methods of the research, we came to the following results. 1. "Taylor Anxiety Measurement Methodology" This methodology consists of 50 and 60 separate statements.
  After reading the questions, they had to answer whether they agree with the statements or not.
 The analysis of the survey revealed that 68% of firefighters have a high level of alarm, 20% have a medium level of high anxiety, and 12% have a medium level of low anxiety.
 2. «T. Holmes and Rahe's method of detecting stress and social adaptation.
  The demand was to remember all the events that happened to them during the last year.
  The methodology consists of 43 ideas and a key, respectively.
 Using this method, we found that 89% of firefighters have high levels of stress resistance, 7% have low levels of stress resistance, and 4% have limited levels of stress resistance.
 3. "Methodology for diagnosing the risk of maladaptation and neuropsychological stability in T. Holmes stress" This method consists of 84 statements, fire-rescuers had to read and answer, depending on whether he agrees with the statements contained in them or not.
 As soon as the use of diagnostic risk and neuropsychological stability diagnostic techniques in T. Holmes Stress is completed, we get the following results.
 The analysis found that 70% of firefighters were high on stress, 20% were moderate on stress, and only about 10% were low on stress. .
 It is clear from the research analysis that if there is no initial psychological training with a correlation between the mental qualities of stress resistance, neuropsychological stability, anxiety, then there is a tendency to loss, grief and other negative mental phenomena.
  The process of reducing the social-psychological vulnerability of the population that survived the earthquake is conditioned by the complex correlation of the mental qualities of the person - stress resistance, neuropsychological stability, psychological adaptation.
 Finally, it can be stated that the rescuers of the fire brigade of the rescue service of the Ministry of Emergency Situations have a high level of training and no change of behavior, passivity, repulsion, pressure, hesitation is observed during the departure of any case.
 The presence of professional, public debt, responsibility, stable motivational system, level of civic, personal high consciousness promotes the motivational system of the person, the level of development of the voluntary sphere, the ability to provide mental stability in emergencies, as well as the ability to manifest and mobilize.
  [2; 46] The effect of stress on a person can be compared to pulling the strings of a violin. If the cord is too short, it will make a deafening and unpleasant sound, and if the cord is too long, it will make a loud noise or the cord will be cut.
  Likewise, if there is little or no stress in our lives, our lives will have no taste or smell, but on the other hand, too much stress can even cause death.
  The important thing is to learn to control it.
 [3; 310] It can be said that the correct use of professional skills and abilities helps the firefighter, who is in an emergency, to be able to demonstrate in a systematic way all the abilities that he has.
  The structural unit of flexibility of adaptation of fire rescuers in both emergency and crisis situations is the interconnection of social-psychological and personal factors.
 .
