The development of regional economic integration grouping and harmonious growth is based on ensuring a high level of complementarity of the economies of the integrating countries.
 The most important of the economic complementarity mechanisms of the integrating countries is the expansion of mutual trade volumes.
  It is known that after the collapse of the USSR, trade relations between the former Soviet republics deteriorated, which was due, on the one hand, to the deterioration of the economic situation in the newly independent countries and the weakening of previously established economic ties, on the other hand, to active processes to penetrate new markets. It was at the expense of trade with the former Soviet partner countries 14 ECONOMICS.
  It is true that in the following years attempts were made at various levels and levels of partnership between these countries to restore the former trade and economic ties, however, they gained more momentum especially after the formation of the EEU between a number of post-Soviet countries.
  The complementarity methodology of the EEU member states combines the diversity of all areas of international economic relations, which underlie the identification of integration development mechanisms through joint trade policy, financial sector, agricultural production, telecommunications technologies, natural resources management, migration flow regulation, production cooperation, etc. 1, p. 127].
  It is due to the high level of economic complementarity of the EEU member states that it is possible to ensure the high effect of the impact of integration on the level of economic development of the Union.
  This effect is estimated at $ 210 billion for the Union by 2030, providing additional GDP growth of up to 13% for each participating country [2, p. 26].
 Statistics show, however, that the intensity of the expansion of trade relations between the member countries of this integration group is not yet sufficient to identify and use the full potential of integration processes, as evidenced by the fact that both exports and imports and the general In terms of trade turnover, the share of total trade volume of the EEU countries in the total volume of foreign trade of those countries has not changed yet, despite the fact that the volume of mutual trade of the EEU countries has registered a certain increase.
  Figure 1 shows that in 2015-2018. Both mutual (within the EEU countries) and foreign (third, non-EEU member states) trade volumes increased during the year, but the growth rates of mutual trade fell short of the growth rates of foreign trade.
  In particular, if during the mentioned period the growth rates of export, payment of 15 ECONOMICS and total trade turnover within the framework of mutual trade were 30.9, 27.6 and 29.3%, respectively, then within the framework of foreign trade higher growth rates were registered - 31.2, 27.9 and 30.0%, respectively.
  Moreover, in 2017 compared to 2018 The growth rate of exports to third countries has almost 3 times exceeded the growth rate of exports within the EEU.
  Thus, if in 2018 The growth rate of foreign exports amounted to about 491 billion US dollars in 2017. The growth rate of mutual exports amounted to about $ 60 billion, increasing by only 9.2% compared to the previous year.
  As for imports, the growth rates of imports from third countries, on the contrary, are lower than the rates of imports within the EEU. if in 2018 Imports from third countries amounted to 263 billion US dollars in 2017 The volume of imports within the EEU amounted to $ 58 billion, increasing by 8.3% compared to the previous year.
 Export Import Total trade cycle Figure 1. Mutual trade with EEU member states and third countries in 2015-2018. [3] Despite the above, the data in Figure 2 show that in 2015-2018. Mutual trade shares of the EEU member states in the total volume of foreign trade remained at almost the same level.
  Thus, since the formation of the EEU, the share of mutual exports in the total volume of exports has been maintained at (11-12)%, the share of mutual imports in the total volume of imports (17-18)% and the volume of mutual trade in total trade. Within (14-15)%.
  This means that exports, imports and trade with third countries continue to exceed the same rates of mutual trade by 8.2, 4.5 and 6.4 times, respectively, which indicates that the EEU member states are still more oriented towards third countries than reciprocal. The development of trade, which, in turn, testifies to the low and still unchanged level of economic complementarity of the EEU countries.
 Export Import Third countries (foreign trade) EEU countries (mutual trade) Total trade cycle Figure 2. Mutual and trade shares of EEU member states in the total volume of foreign trade in 2015-2018. [3] As can be seen from Table 1, the mutual trade of the EEU member states in 2018 amounted to about 59.7 billion US dollars in 2017 compared to 9.2%.
  It is noteworthy that 17 ECONOMICS between these countries before the formation of the EEU, larger volumes of mutual trade were registered.
  Thus, still in 2013. It amounted to 69.3 billion US dollars, which decreased in the following years, in 2016. reaching up to $ 43.0 billion, which was due to economic sanctions against Russia at that time, falling international oil prices, reduced remittances from member states, and so on.
  Note that in 2013-2018. The largest rate of decline in mutual trade between the EEU countries was registered in 2015. (25.4%), and the biggest growth in 2017. (27.4%).
  As for the mutual trade movement of the member states in the period after the formation of the EEU, it should be noted that only Armenia, Belarus and Kyrgyzstan have been growing steadily, and the volume of mutual trade with Kazakhstan and Russia has started to increase only from Since 2016.
  It is noteworthy that in 2017 compared to 2018 The highest growth rate of mutual trade with the EEU countries was registered in Armenia (increasing by 20.6% against the amount of 571.1 million US dollars in 2017), and the lowest rate was registered in Belarus (increasing by 1.8% in the amount of 13,651.1 million US dollars in 2017).
  By the way, compared to the other EEU member states, in 20162018 The highest growth rates of mutual trade were registered in Armenia during 2016 (53.7% in 2016, 45.0% in 2017, 20.6% in 2018).
 Table 1 Mutual trade of EEU member states in 2013-2018 during [3], [4, p. 19,] million USD Armenia Belarus Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Russia 43,905.5 36,887.6 28,821.2 26,804.3 34,685.6 38,679.9 EEU 69,249.2 61,183.3 45,615.7 42,960.3 54,711.8 59,721.1 18 ECONOMICS STRUCTURE According to the data, Russia (64.8%), Belarus (23.3%) and Kazakhstan (9.9%) had a significant share in the mutual trade of the EEU countries.
  Meanwhile, Belarus (39.1%) is in the first place in terms of imports, Russia is in the second place (32.7%), and Kazakhstan is in the third place (22.7%) (Figure 3).
 Armenia Kazakhstan Armenia Kazakhstan Belarus Kyrgyzstan Exports Belarus Kyrgyzstan Import Figure 3. EEU reciprocal trade structure (export and import) by member countries' share in 2018 (%) [3] Although the above-mentioned analysis of EEU reciprocal trade shows that it has been growing quantitatively in the last three years, a qualitative assessment of the EEU reciprocal trade is important to consider its impact on the intensity of integration processes within the group. .
  To this end, a number of indexes are used based on the methodology of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) [5], which, by combining the trade data of regional integration groups with the complete foreign trade and global trade data of these groups, provide distortion 19 ECONOMICS Describe the real trends and state of mutual trade within the group.
 One of such indices is the Regional Trade Intensity Index (RTII), which is the share of the regional integration of a group or its member country in the total foreign trade turnover and the share of the regional turnover of that group in world trade.
 The integration trade indices of a member country of the integration group and the regional trade intensity of the integration group are determined by the following formulas: Անդամ Regional Trade Intensity Index (RTII i) of a Member of an Integration Group [6, p. 129]: ավորման Integration Grouping Regional Trade Intensity Index (RTII j), where X ijt is the annual (t) volume of i-country exports to the y region, M ijt is the annual (t) volume of i-country imports y from the region, X t - the annual (t) volume of mutual exports of the region, M t - the annual (t) volume of mutual imports of the region, X jt - the annual (t) volume of total exports of the j region (to third countries) , M jt is the annual volume (t) of total imports from region j (from third countries), X wt is the annual volume (t) of world exports,
 If the index is equal to 1 point, it means that the intensity of mutual trade between the member countries of the regional integration group is equal to the intensity of foreign trade with third countries.
  If the index is greater than 1, it indicates that there is a "geographical roll", ie a trade orientation towards the grouping of 20 ECONOMICS countries, due to regional preferences (geographical proximity, low transport costs, historical and cultural commonality, and etc).
 And if the index is less than 1, then the intensity of foreign trade with third countries is higher than the intensity of mutual trade within the group, ie the level of trade integration is low.
 Calculations show that Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan carry out more intensive foreign trade with the EEU partner countries, despite the fact that in 2016-2018. During these years, the intensity indices of these countries are decreasing, which means that the latter tend to increase the level of foreign trade intensity with third countries.
  As for Armenia and Kyrgyzstan, the regional trade intensity indices in these countries are at less than 1 level, ie the intensity of mutual trade with the latter, the EEU member states is quite low, moreover, in Armenia and Kyrgyzstan also in 2016-2018. During the year, the intensity of regional trade was gradually decreasing.
  It should be noted, however, that, in general, the regional trade of the EEU as an integration group has a high level of intensity (10.2 in 2018), which is also gradually decreasing (Table 2).
 Table 2 Regional Trade Intensity Index in EEU Countries 2015-2018 [3], [7] 1 Armenia Belarus Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Russia EEU Calculations made by the author 10.19 ECONOMICS Thus, the data in Tables 1 and 2 show that it is true that the volume of EEU mutual trade is growing, but Along with this growth, the intensity of regional trade is decreasing.
  From the above it can be concluded that the potential of economic integration is not fully used within this group.
 The next important index is the Symmetric trade introversion index (STJ), which is an indicator of the relative intensity of regional foreign trade, which compares the intensity of domestic and foreign trade of the regional integration group and reveals whether the region's mutual or foreign trade. intensity increases at a higher rate [8, pp. 6-7].
  It is determined by the following formula: or STJ HITI i is a homogeneous index of domestic trade intensity, calculated by the following formula: HETI i is a homogeneous index of foreign trade intensity, calculated by the following formula: where IT is the volume of domestic trade in the region, T - The total trade turnover of the region, T - the volume of world trade, ET - the volume of foreign trade in the region, which is determined by the following formula: T, ECONOMICS - is the foreign trade turnover of a country with countries outside the region.
 The Proportional Trade Invasion Index fluctuates in the range [-1; 1], where the coefficient -1 indicates the absence of intra-regional trade, 0 implies "geographical neutrality", ie equality of trade with domestic and third countries, and in the case of 1 there is no The region's trade with third countries.
 The data in Table 3 show that the Index of Proportional Trade Invasion in the EEU for 2015-2018 fluctuates within the range of (0.85-0.88), which means that the intensity of mutual trade in the EEU countries is growing at a higher rate than the intensity of trade with third countries, in other words, intra-regional domestic trade is more important for member states. than foreign trade with third countries.
  At the same time, it should be noted that both the Regional Trade Intensity Index and the Proportional Trade Invasion Index have been gradually declining since 2016, which is another signal of the declining intensity of mutual trade within the EEU.
 Table 3 Proportional Trade Invasion Index in EEU Countries 2015-2018 [3], [7] 2 Index As for the commodity structure of the EEU member states, its analysis shows that almost 1/3 of the EEU mutual trade (28.7% or $ 17.1 billion) falls "Minerals" Commodity Calculations were made by the author to 23 ECONOMICS group, the majority of which (85.1% or $ 14.6 billion) is provided by Russia (mainly in the field of mineral fuel and oil).
  Russia (60.5% or $ 6.9 billion) and Belarus (35.5% or 4.0) occupy a relatively high share in mutual trade (Machinery, Equipment and Vehicles) (19.0% or $ 11.4 billion). billion USD).
  In third place are products belonging to the group "Food and Agricultural Raw Materials", which account for more than half of trade (51.4% or $ 4.5 billion), and more than 1/3 (37.1% or $ 3.3 billion) To Russia.
 Commodity groups "Metals and articles thereof" (13.1%) and "Products of chemical industry" (11.6%) also have a significant share in the mutual trade of the EEU countries (Table 3).
 Table 3 Mutual trade of EEU member states by enlarged product groups in 2018 [3] million USD Product Name Minerals Machinery, Equipment & Vehicles Food & Agricultural Raw Materials Metals & Products Made of Chemicals Products including EEU Armenia-Bela-Kazakhstan-Kyrgyzstan-Russia Russian Home and footwear Wood, pulp and paper products Leather raw materials, furskins and articles thereof Other goods 3,629.6 Total 59,721.1 689.0 13,891.8 5,891.9 568.4 38,679.9 Taking into account the fact that the EEU mutual trade is quite large, that the dynamics of mutual trade is significantly affected by changes in world prices of products included in this product group; On the one hand, an increase in these prices can lead to an increase in mutual trade, and on the other hand, a decrease in them can significantly reduce the level of mutual trade.
  This means that in order to ensure the sustainable growth of EEU reciprocal trade, the expansion of non-mineral production in the group's member states is an important task, which requires, first of all, to increase the level of competitiveness of the output in the EEU countries.
  Nevertheless, it should be noted that the increase in the level of competitiveness of goods may lead to an increase in their exports to third, more developed countries due to the reduction of mutual exports.
  Proof of this is the fact that "before the formation of the EEU 15-20 years ago, the volume of mutual trade between all current member states was higher than in the period after the formation of the EEU, which, however, does not indicate an insufficient level of integration within the EEU. "Because 20 years ago, non-raw materials produced in those countries were less competitive in foreign countries. 25 and therefore mainly exported to future EEU member states, while as their competitiveness increased, the share of the EEU market in the total trade of member countries gradually decreased." [9, pp. 86-87].
 To present the mentioned more vividly, let us note that in 2015-2018. During the year, the mutual trade of non-mineral products within the EEU registered a continuous growth trend (Figure 4).
  During that period it increased by 39.9%, while the total mutual trade (including mineral products) - by only 30.9%.
  It is noteworthy that if in 2015 compared to 2016 The total volume of EEU mutual trade decreased by 5.8%, from $ 45.6 billion to $ 43.0 billion, then in the same period without mineral products (salt, sulfur, minerals, ore, slag and ash, mineral fuel, oil and Distillation products) on the contrary, the volume of mutual trade increased by 3.1% from $ 30.4 billion to $ 31.4 billion.
 Figure 4. Mutual trade of EEU member states (except for mineral products) in 2015-2018. (3 billion USD) [3] 26 ECONOMICS Noting the intensity of mutual trade within the economic integration group, it is also necessary to identify the sectors of the economy of the member countries, the development of which can increase the effect of integration.
 According to the report published by the Eurasian Economic Commission, these spheres are the following according to the member states.  Armenia: transport and communications, agriculture, mechanical engineering, production and distribution of electricity and water, natural gas distribution (transit), տար Belarus: production of petroleum products, chemicals, rubber and plastics and other non-metallic goods, mechanical engineering, metallurgy, electricity and water production and distribution, ախ Kazakhstan: metallurgy, mechanical engineering, petroleum products, chemical production, rubber and plastics production, non-metallic mineral production, transport and communications, զ Kyrgyzstan: machinery, transport and communications, petroleum products, Production of rubber and plastic and other non-metallic products, metallurgy,  Russia: Mechanical Engineering, Metallurgy, Production of Petroleum Products, Chemicals, Rubber and Plastics and Other Non-Metallic Products [10, p. 12-13].
 By the way, according to the above-mentioned report, machine-building, oil production, chemical production and metallurgy account for more than 60% of the total assessment of the potential effect of integration within the EEU [10, p. 11-12].
 Thus, the analysis of intra-regional trade flows shows that there are contradictory tendencies in the processes taking place within the EEU.
  On the one hand, there is a dynamic growth of EEU mutual trade, on the other hand, the unchanged level of the share of mutual trade in the total foreign trade of the member states about still insufficient rates of trade integration.
  This leads to the conclusion that the further development of integration processes within the EEU and the growth of international competitiveness of the structure are conditioned by the diversification and modernization of member economies, the growth of industry saturation, expansion of economic ties between all member states, implementation of joint investment programs, development of information technologies. which will contribute not only to the conquest of new foreign markets by those countries, but also to the further expansion of mutual trade due to the opportunities provided by regional economic integration.
 .
