Consider an anisotropic homogeneous three-layer closed circular hollow cylindrical membrane with a fixed length l (Fig. 1).
  Axial-symmetric membranes are considered, in the deformation of which the displacements of the points are given by the vectors (u (α), v (α), w (α)), where u (α), v (α) and w (α) - The displacement components of points are the three-dimensional curved curves attached to the middle surfaces of the membranes in the corresponding directions α, β and γ of the coordinate system.
  Note that the α coordinate is directed by the parent of the membrane, β is directed by the circular arc of intersection of the plane perpendicular to the axis of the membrane, and γ is directed by the normal of the mean surface.
 375 MATHEMATICS Figure 1 Figure 2 Basic research of anisotropic homogeneous plates and membranes was performed by S. Hambardzumyan in the second half of the last century.
  Based on Kirchhoff-Lյw's classical theory of membranes, in the presence of one plane of elastic symmetry, the displacement of the points of displacement of the mid-surface points of the membrane with respect to the components u (α), v (α) and w (α) is [1] axial circular thin-walled cylindrical equilibrium. motion) the following system of equations. In the system of equations (1), X, Y, and Z are the external forces applied to the outer surface of the membrane and directed along the α, β, and γ coordinate axes.
  Cij and Dij are 376 MATHEMATICS coefficients of membrane tensile-compression, slip, bending and torsion stiffness, and in the case of single-layer membranes are determined by the following formulas: Bij is the coefficient of elasticity of the membrane, and h (α) is the thickness of the membrane.
 It is assumed that one of the following boundary conditions occurs at each of the α = 0 and α = l edges of the observed membrane: I Free edge II Edge with articulation: III Tightly edged edge IV Articulated and tangentially free edge: Here T 1 is the stress inside the membrane (Fig. 3) in the direction of α, M 1 is the bending moment, N 1 is the shear force and S 12 is the sliding force in the tangential direction.
  These quantities are expressed through the components of relative elongation, slip, bending and torsion. (4) MATHEMATICS And the latter are expressed by the components of the displacement vector u (α), v (α) and w (α). Figure 3 Figure 4 In this article, we will consider membranes of variable thickness described by a function depending on the α coordinate.
  Three-layer slabs and membranes are of practical importance.
  Consider a three-layer cylindrical membrane, the layers of which are characterized by the following features: The two outer layers of the membrane are quite thin, each of which is h 1 (α) thick, and these layers work under the classical Kirchhoff-Lyav hypothesis of linear elastic deformation of the membranes.
  The middle layer is relatively thick, has a constant value of 2h 0, it does not withstand the deformation of the membrane and is designed mainly to neutralize any kind of physical (thermal, sound, radiation, ...) effects.
  The thickness of the membrane (Fig. 2, represented by the plane perpendicular to the axis of the membrane and the section of the membrane) is given by the following formula [2,3,4]. In the case of layers with such properties, the stiffness coefficients of the membrane are determined by the following formulas: Suppose the membrane makes free oscillations.
  In this case, in the right parts of the system of equations of motion (1) ar the hot forces are inertial forces 378 MATHEMATICS.
  Excluding from such a system of motion equations the time parameter corresponding to the harmonic oscillations and taking into account the total thickness composition in three layers (6), the external forces will be represented as follows: Let's formulate the following problem of optimal design. Find the variable thickness h 1 (α) of the outer layers characterizing the thickness of the observed membrane, in which case the mass of the membrane has the smallest value compared to all the membranes of the same class, whose principal value of its oscillations is ω 0.
 Membranes of the same class are those that satisfy the same boundary conditions (one of the conditions (3.1) - (3.4) in each of the edges α = 0 and α = l), all the physical properties and geometrical parameters of those membranes except the required thickness of the outer layers , are the same.
 So we have an optimal design problem where: The objective function is the M integral value of the membrane mass.
 The control (or optimization) parameter is a function that describes the thickness of the membrane.
  By selecting this function, the smallest mass value must be obtained in a given class of membranes. Restrictions. The system of equations (1) must be satisfied, where the stiffness coefficients are given by (7) relations, and the external forces by (8) formulas, in which ω = ω 0 must be taken.
  The given boundary conditions form the rest of the constraints.
 In essence, we have a conditional extremum problem, to solve which we use the Lagrange multiplication method to form a new 379 MATHEMATICS expanded J function by introducing three complex functions.
  Using the δJ = 0 variational principle of the extreme of functions, we will get the necessary conditions of optimality, from which by excluding the three imported complex functions, we will have the necessary conditions for the optimization problem: (1) equations with given boundary conditions, (7), (8) equation. If at least one of the coefficients of elasticity B 16 and B 26 is not equal to zero, then in system (1), (10) the unknown functions u (α), v (α), w (α) and h 1 (α) are characterized by anisotropic (elastic in one plane of symmetry) membranes.
  They are interconnected, that is, the free oscillations of the membrane are made by three-dimensional displacement of the membrane points, and the components u (α), v (α), and w (α) are not necessarily zero at the same time.
  The situation changes when the membrane is orthotropic (there are three planes of elastic symmetry at each point of the membrane), then B 16 = B 26 = 0.
  In this case, the components of the point displacement vector are separated by two types of deformations: a) net torsion: u (α) = w (α) = 0, v (α) ≠ 0, b) only bending-stretching, without torsion: u (α) ≠ 0 and w (α) ≠ 0, v (α) = 0.
 The problem of pure scrolling has been observed in [4,6] works, in the first of which even an analytical solution has been obtained.
 Let us consider here an orthotropic membrane that makes free oscillations, assuming that only bending-stretching deformation occurs.
  This means that in system (1), (10) and (3) we have to take B 16 = B 26 = v (α) = 0.
  Divide the segment [0, l] into n equal parts, resulting in xi = i · ∆, ∆ = l / n, i = 0,1,2, ... n ,.
  In the three equations obtained and in the boundary conditions, the derivatives of the functions u (α), w (α) and h 1 (α) 380 MATHEMATICS are represented by finite variant formulas, e.g. or (11a) At the points where (11) the equations (0) come out of the [0, l] section, they are replaced by the corresponding left-wing variations. (11b) Thus we get a system of nonlinear algebraic equations 3i (i = 0,1,2, ..., n) to the unknowns u (i), w (i) and h 1 (i). Equations derived from boundary conditions are also attached to this system.
 The system is solved numerically by sequential approximations. First, the zero level layer of unknowns is taken. Then, solving system (12) with respect to unknowns u (i), w (i) and h 1 (i) (the values ​​of the remaining unknowns are taken from the zero level layer), the first level layer is found.
 Coherence is checked. The sum of the squares of the differences between the values ​​of the obtained and the previous layers is calculated in all points, and it is compared with the number ε = 0.001.
  If the condition of convergence occurs, the sum is less than ε 381 MATHEMATICS problem is considered solved.
  Otherwise, the next level layer is formed in the same way and the concurrency is checked.
 The cycle continues as long as the condition of concurrence is not met.
  The calculations were performed using the Wolfram Mthematica software package.
 The graph of the function h 1 (α) is shown in Figure 4.
 .
