There is no unequivocal approach to the perception and idea of ​​a social enterprise in Armenia.
  [2, p. 4] In the absence of criteria for defining social entrepreneurship and its implementation, the essence of the latter is interpreted differently.
  In Armenia, the public perception of social entrepreneurship is related to the function of providing employment to vulnerable groups or is perceived as a distribution of part of the profit for charitable purposes, directing it to alleviate any social problem.
  However, the scope of social entrepreneurship is much wider and more comprehensive.
  In practice, social entrepreneurship in our country is mainly engaged in civil society organizations (CSOs).
 MANAGEMENT The nature of social enterprise is not the same in the whole territory of the republic.
  Most of the social enterprises are concentrated in Yerevan.
  In order to study the opportunities for the development of social entrepreneurship in the Republic of Armenia, a sociological research was conducted (for the preparation of this article, one of the qualitative methods of sociological research was carried out by an expert survey.
 The experts were selected by the method of snow pile, the survey tool was a semi-standardized questionnaire, the venue was social entrepreneurship centers operating in the Republic of Armenia, the survey period was 01.08.2019-01.09.2019) from which it became clear that the development of social entrepreneurship in Armenia The following 6 problems. Հստակ Clear definition of social entrepreneurship and clarification of implementation criteria; բարձր Raising the level of public awareness and awareness of social entrepreneurship; ում Provision of state guarantees, benefits and clarification of regulations; գնահատ Assessment of risks and failures for implementation of social entrepreneurship;
 Below are the necessary suggestions for the implementation of the above steps. Studying the international leading experience and conducting expert opinion polls with successful social entrepreneurs in Armenia, it is proposed to develop a policy aimed at the development of social entrepreneurship, which will help overcome obstacles in the field and develop the practice of social entrepreneurship in Armenia.
  Thus it is suggested: MANAGEMENT ել Develop manuals, work on definitions, values ​​and principles, criteria and impact assessment of social entrepreneurship.
 To cover the essence of social entrepreneurship, successful examples, etc. in different ways in order to raise public awareness.
  Complete the adoption of the Social Entrepreneurship Development Concept, which is currently on the joint website for publishing draft legal acts.
  [6] սահման Establish organizational and legal standards for social entrepreneurship. Grant status of "social entrepreneurship" to the superpowers of organizations based on raising social issues, developing and implementing actions to improve them, environmental measures, and as a result, positive social impact.
 Ության Social entrepreneurship standards should also clarify financial flows. Invest 50% or more of the profit to ensure social impact, which will ensure the integration of socially vulnerable groups.
  Set the next benchmark for social entrepreneurship for financing, according to which 70% or more of the business turnover should come from entrepreneurship, which will ensure its sustainability, as shown in Figure 1.
 Առումով In terms of guarantees, it is proposed to provide state support to those engaged in social entrepreneurship.
  In addition, redistribute funds from the integration of socially vulnerable groups to those social entrepreneurs who provide the latter with jobs.
  As well as the right of pre-emption within the framework of public procurement, reduction of income tax for persons with disabilities, increase of the percentage of contributions aimed at solving various charitable or social problems, etc.
 Figure 1. Social Entrepreneurship Model ումն In addition, it is necessary to change the strategy of the National Center for Small and Medium Enterprise Development of Armenia (SME DNC), giving it social orientation and directing existing funds to the creation of social enterprises and start-up development opportunities.
 Կառավար Social Entrepreneurship Risk Management Like any other initiative, start-ups are not guaranteed to fail or fail.
  An organization is considered successful when it achieves its target social impact, but it must also consider the various risks associated with financial viability, operational efficiency, competition, market changes, and so on.
  RES 104 GOVERNANCE The practice of feed management envisages taking active steps to prevent risk-related events or to control their impact on the enterprise.
 Risk management consists of the following four main steps: 1) Risk identification 2) Risk assessment 3) Risk management 4) Risk review and reporting.
 1. Risk identification Risks threatening social enterprises can be classified into the following five groups.
  For each group, several questions are suggested to help identify the risk that belongs to that group.
 Income կայուն The stability of income flow must be taken into account.
  Is the number of customers enough to ensure the organization's operations in the short to medium term?
  How realistic is the prospect of a future plan to expand the customer base?
  What is the current market situation?
  Is there a risk that the product or service of the enterprise will no longer be in demand or will yield to the available alternatives in the short, medium and long term?
 People բոլոր Are all team members motivated enough?
  Is there a risk that any of the members of the organization, especially any key member, may leave the company in the short or medium term?
  What are the working conditions of the enterprise?
 Is there any risk of harm to the health and well-being of the team members?
 Property  Is the physical property of the enterprise reasonably protected against theft, fire, natural disasters or other phenomena?
 Ձեռնարկ Is the intellectual property of the enterprise unique and, if so, is it insured against the risk of misappropriation and / or duplication?
  What is the rating of the company's brand and reputation among its customers and beneficiaries?
 Liability  Is there a risk that the enterprise's products or services may harm its customers or the public?
 Compliance with the law  Are there any risks of breaking the law in the activities of the enterprise, for example, damaging the environment, unfair working practices, etc.?
 ։ Is the enterprise fully aware of all laws and regulations relating to its operations, products / services offered, stakeholder groups, mission and other activities?
 2. Risk Assessment There are a number of ways to assess the identified risk priority.
  One of them is the preparation of the "Probability vs. Impact" table below, on the basis of which the total value of each risk is calculated.
 Risk probability ազդեցություն Risk impact ↓ 3. Risk management The five main approaches to risk management are as follows:  risk acceptance,  risk management. includes a specific action that may reduce the likelihood or impact of the risk; 106 MANAGEMENT  Risk transfer. Under this strategy, the effects of the risk are transferred to a third party, such as property insurance, to manage the risk of loss.
 Ում Avoiding risk. If there is a direct causal link between a particular factor and a given risk, the latter can be avoided by curbing the impact of the former.
 4. Risk Review and Reporting / Recording Identified and assessed risks should be recorded in the organization's "knowledge base" (preferably in writing, or at least through discussion with the team) to mark lessons learned and better prepare for similar situations in the future.
 If the risks are not managed in time, they can fail certain activities of the social enterprise or the whole activity of the organization.
 Գնահատում Social Entrepreneurship Impact Assessment The impact of social entrepreneurship can be assessed through the following steps: 1. Start by formulating the mission of the enterprise.
 It is, in fact, the cornerstone of assessing the effectiveness of social entrepreneurship.
  Unlike other entrepreneurs, social entrepreneurs often look for market gaps, failures, neglected areas, injustices and social inequalities.
  Because the main goal of social entrepreneurs is to have a positive impact on society by solving social problems.
  [3, p. 2. Turn the company's mission into tangible products and results.
 The products of the enterprise are the direct result of its work, for example, the number of products produced, the number of customers served.
  The results of the enterprise, on the other hand, are the "small targets" of the overall social mission of the enterprise, for example, the number of people with disabilities employed (if the mission of the enterprise is to improve the living standards of people with disabilities), the number of trees planted (if the social enterprise mission is natural resources). etc.
  It is necessary to set manageable but ambitious targets for products and results for each reporting period, for example on a quarterly or annual basis.
 3. Link the entrepreneurial activity to its products and results.
 It is necessary to give clear definitions of social entrepreneurship operations (and their volumes) in order to ensure the products and results defined in the previous step.
 4. Define the chain of influence of entrepreneurship and its corresponding indicators.
 It is necessary to write down and clearly describe how the entrepreneurial activity is related to its product and then to the results in order to ensure the impact defined in the formulation of the mission.
  It is necessary to define indicators at each stage, ie measurable parameters.
  [1, p. Thus it should be noted that social entrepreneurship contributes to economic stability and poverty alleviation, which is the mission of a social market economy.
  Figure 2 presents the social entrepreneurship model, its two main socio-economic impacts and their relationship to the social market economy.
 Ում Expansion of the scale of social enterprise activity The models of social enterprise expansion can be divided into the following three approaches: Ընդ Expansion of geographical area. This is, in fact, the expansion of the social enterprise to other geographical areas.
  For example, in the 1970s, OXFAM had a chain of about 250 charities, which in 2016 grew to more than 700,108 GOVERNMENTS.
  [4, p. 67] Another way to expand the geographical area is the use of modern technologies.
  For example, a social enterprise that teaches programming skills to vulnerable groups can provide online training to reach a wider audience.
  This approach has already been used by the Instigate Training Center, a beneficiary of the LIFE program, to make its educational activities accessible to vulnerable groups.
  The center has created a website that provides online training, spreading the organization's social impact on people with disabilities and other vulnerable groups without the need to physically accept more beneficiaries.
  [5] ընդ Expansion of the field of activity. This approach assumes an increase in the activity of the social enterprise with new values ​​and new ways for the further expansion of its social mission, without the obligatory expansion of the geographical space or the target group.
  For example, "Zartprint" company started its activity in the territory of the Republic of Armenia as a social enterprise providing design and printing services, which provides jobs to people with disabilities.
  However, one of the main directions of expanding the sphere of activity of the enterprise is the introduction of Braille printing and the development of large font printing service.
  The above-mentioned enterprise, in fact, was the first to introduce those services in the Armenian market.
  In this way, the company gets closer to its mission to improve the lives of people with disabilities, without the need to reproduce its business model through geographical expansion or franchising.
  The company is expanding through the introduction of new products and services and new business models.
  Even in the case of newly formed social enterprises, it is necessary to consider future development options and develop a preliminary expansion plan.
  This is also an important factor in choosing a business model 109 MANAGEMENT (for example, very often, the possibilities of expansion are completely different in the case of employment and market mediation models).
 .
