The transition to mass distance learning due to the worldwide COVID-19 has revealed problems not only with the organizational but also with the management skills of university education.
  The total and especially unprepared transition from traditional education to online education created a shocking situation in the academic environment.
  In such a situation, the management of education faced new challenges.
 In particular, the academic environment was required to activate functions such as gaining access to multimedia tools, promoting academic self-organization, preventing student social isolation, and activating feedback between education beneficiaries.
 Online education has firmly taken root in the international university educational environment, competing with traditional teaching methods.
 And the reason is not only that this form of teaching is less expensive than the traditional one, it has a massive enrollment of students, uses modern information and communication systems and has the convenience of organization.
  Today, the beneficiaries of educational services, be they students, lecturers or employers, are striving to see more dynamic developments in the field of education.
  On the one hand, knowledge is now rapidly "obsolete", on the other hand, it is becoming more diverse and multi-layered for the student, as the range of skills and abilities of graduates expands.
  [1] And it turns out that it is not possible to train competitive graduates in the labor market only with classroom lectures and classes.
  Education requires comprehensive awareness, large-scale group discussions, mass academic debates, exchange of experience, and the use of online tools in these processes.
 Online learning is also becoming attractive for time stakeholders in terms of time management.
  The lack of contact requirements allows teaching participants to show mutual flexibility and individual approach to the organization of lessons.
  And this is especially important now, as most students, especially in the master's and postgraduate courses, work in parallel with their studies and are able to regulate their work in the online GOVERNMENT.
  Studies show that in the international practice, the online education system is more involved, especially those students who already have university degrees, but by participating in training courses, gain new job skills in special courses that do not provide educational degrees (see Figure 1.) .
  However, at the same time, the share of online education programs in master's and postgraduate studies is gradually increasing.
 Doctorate, Master (35%) Undergraduate, Pre-Bachelor, (15%) Special courses without a degree (with certificates) (50%) Figure 1. Distribution of students in online education programs by educational level In recent years, about 29.7% of students in the higher education system has participated in at least one distance education course [2, p.4].
 Prior to the outbreak, distance learning in the Republic of Armenia may have been ingrained in school curricula, with teaching in remote and border villages, and in the university environment, it has only just begun, and as a result, about 2% of students have at least one took a distance course, even in that case. It has been several years since a number of documents regulating the field of distance learning were developed in the Republic of Armenia.
  [3] COVID-19 came to prove that distance education needed to be given more serious attention, especially when the doors of universities were temporarily closed to students.
  Insufficient technical equipment of distance learning, lack of electronic databases, lack of experience in teaching related to the field, distrust of this educational technology became obvious.
 However, the problems of online learning were first and foremost related to the construction of teaching methodology and the organization of teaching.
 It should be noted that online learning is often confused with distance learning.
  Distance learning can be organized by e-mail, sending students relevant electronic materials and receiving answers to inquiries and tests from them.
  Distance education can be organized through video messages and videotaped lectures, when the student listens to the material provided by the lecturer with the help of a video conferencing tool on different platforms.
 However, online learning, by including the above-mentioned learning methods, is more comprehensive, and seeks to transform traditional educational technologies into a virtual world.
  Moreover, this transfer should be done in such a way that the student does not feel the losses of the provision of traditional educational services, and moreover, enjoys the advantages of e-education (see Figure 2).
 Thus, in contrast to traditional teaching, in the case of online learning there is no direct communication between the learner and the lecturer, there is academic competition in student groups, the task of targeting the audience is quite difficult, a number of individual and mental conditions are required, as well as strict self-discipline. from the learner's independence and self-awareness, especially when student-centered learning is organized [4. page 56].
 Traditional Learning Online Learning Figure 2. Student-centered propensity for online learning programs However, we believe that in the case of online learning, students' motivation for academic activity should be greater than in traditional education (see Figure 2.), otherwise online learning will lose its appeal. It will be boring for the listeners if the lack of university environment is not supplemented by fascinating distance learning and modern educational technologies.
 Experience shows that in the case of distance learning, there are more cases of expelling students than in the traditional course 173 MANAGEMENT.
  For example, the number of students enrolled in distance learning at various colleges in the United States is 20-50%, and the number of graduates is 10-20% lower than in traditional courses.
 In addition, social isolation is also a negative factor in online learning. Communication technologies lead to the isolation of students, reducing the control by the lecturer.
 In order for distance learning methods to be effective, professional literature suggests: - Pay more attention to the learner, making the teaching student-centered, thoroughly plan and organize the learner's activities, - Define learning goals and objectives, provide the necessary learning materials, - Provide maximum interaction between learners and teachers, - Provide opportunities for group learning, - Implement among learners feedback and create an atmosphere of academic interest.
  [5, p. 45] In this regard, a number of important academic tools should be used in the online learning methodology, such as e-guided lectures, e-tutorials, distance seminars (WEB seminars), broadcast lectures, group online discussions (see Figure 3). .).
  The listed tools will enable to ensure students' academic activity in the online learning system and make learning attractive.
  Naturally, in order to increase the level of academic discipline and academic self-organization, it is necessary to establish "student attendance norms" at the e-university, or requirements for learning activity on the Internet.
 174 GOVERNANCE e-learning materials group online discussions e-exercises distance learning lectures seminars Figure 3. The minimum academic toolkit for online learning Methodology The primary condition for increasing the effectiveness of online learning methodology is the transformation and adaptation of traditional learning technologies to the university environment Lack of live communication with students, non-inclusion in student groups, as a result of which promotes the activity of individual learning and the student's presence on the Internet.
 The academic environment at the university has always "polished" the student, giving him the behavior appropriate to an intellectual.
  In this sense, attending university from the Middle Ages to the present day is an honor and an academic pride for every individual.
  At the same time, however, nowadays, online education opposes this tendency to attend universities, which, by giving the student professional qualities, seems to remove him / her from live contacts in the academic environment and transfer education to the Internet, and courses to the electronic field.
 And it turns out that traditional university education, along with the above-mentioned advantages, is currently experiencing a "crisis" as the number of students enrolled in distance learning programs on the planet grows, who have relatively passive attendance at universities and prefer to study e-learning. in the environment.
 In our opinion, the current "crisis" of traditional university education has a number of reasons.
  First, if in the past the university was a source of knowledge and a forge of epistemology, now that role is gradually giving way to the Internet.
  If in the past, the key motivation for students to attend university was the acquisition of knowledge, now it is possible to get it on a larger and faster way from the Internet, where, by the way, the range of both theoretical and practical information is growing rapidly.
  And it is not accidental that in modern conditions the teaching staff can not "compete" with the online in terms of providing mass knowledge-based information.
 Besides, the knowledge formed in the information society age is becoming obsolete faster than in the recent past.
  And if in the industrial society the graduates used the knowledge gained during four or five years of university education for decades, now, before graduating from university, the epistemological information of education often begins to fall short of the changing demands of the labor market.
  And it turns out that attending university and studying for years contains certain risks of acquiring "rapidly obsolete knowledge", so the requirement of an individual's presence in the university becomes irrelevant in those respect.
 However, online training is not perfect in terms of methodology either. which is mentioned many times in professional literature.
  Thus, among the disadvantages of distance learning is that  there is no direct communication between the learner and the teacher,  it is difficult to form a creative atmosphere in the group of learners, and when there is no one next to the learner who can inspire him / her, it can severely affect the learning process.  High demands are placed on the organization and management of the learning process, the task of targeting the listeners is quite difficult,  a number of individual and psychological conditions are needed, as well as strict self-discipline, which directly depends on the learner's independence and self-awareness; ագիտական ​​certain professional practical skills is obtained only by doing real (but not virtual) practical and laboratory work [6, pp. 15-19],Ումը Teaching through communication technologies leads to the isolation of students, reduces the supervision of the teacher,։ students are not always ready for intense, effective independent work, self-organization, are able to personally plan academic work, there is no self-discipline [7].
 GOVERNANCE In this regard, we propose key principles for managing online learning, which are interconnected and should operate simultaneously throughout the teaching period (see Figure 4.).
 Promoting Feedback Lectures Leading to Social Self-Isolation Preventing Benefits: Promoting Self-Organization with Multimedia Tools Figure 4. Key Functions of Managing Online Learning Not having the opportunity to attend classrooms and being alone against a computer.
  In this regard, in any course design, the lecturer's words should be heard, when the instructor presents the purpose of the teaching to the listener with a video message, the expected learning outcomes in terms of "knowledge-skills-ability 178 MANAGEMENT".
  Then the video message addressed to the student should present the student's learning methods, assessment approaches and other organizational tips and guidance related to the course.
 The series of guiding lectures is also important, which should be videotaped if possible, otherwise in PDF text format.
  Having ample opportunities to obtain epistemological information from the Internet, however, without instructional lectures, the student will be entangled in the "information web".
  In this regard, thematic and targeted lectures are provided during distance learning, which guide the student in choosing the alternative information available on the Internet related to learning.
 Therefore, the presence of guiding lectures is a necessary principle in the process of designing an online course (see Figure 2).
 Distance learning has a risk of developing a "boredom symptom", but it can be overcome with the use of active multimedia tools (see Figure 2).
  Being in an "electronic" environment and not feeling the warmth of an academic live audience, listening to a series of distance lectures, doing e-exercises alone, not enjoying the praise of the lecturer or classmates addressed to him, the distance learning just becomes boring for the student.
  It is here that profitable signals should be used when designing the course, which will give liveliness to the learning.
  They can be in the rating scale of the student group included in the distance learning course, regular presentations of the learner's progress position, earnings of emotional visual cues in solving the correct e-exercises, incentives in the multimedia format, etc.
 Promoting self-organization is also an important principle in the process of managing online learning.
  Education 179 MANAGEMENT There is self-organization in the field that is more successful in adult age groups, and it is more risky among young people.
  Therefore, any distance learning process should be accompanied by a special instruction detailing the schedule of e-tests, current and final exams for exercises, webinar days, and hours for organizing online group debate clubs.
 The requirements for maximum and minimum hourly student presence on the Internet for each process are also noteworthy.
  The student should not take a passive position in the case of webinars, online debates, which can be monitored in these learning processes by his / her actual hourly presence on the Internet.
  On the other hand, students are introduced to the maximum limits of being on the Internet when taking tests, e-exercises, or exam questions.
  Naturally, the limitations of online learning hours will force the student to self-organize and implement effective time management.
 The prevention of student social self-isolation risks is also taken into account when managing online learning.
  In this regard, videotaped teaching materials, webinars, online student debate forums, group assignments, and programs should be used as much as possible in teaching, which will guide the teaching process and will not lead to distance learning through self-isolation (see Figure 4).
 The most important link in the application of the above principles of online learning management is the provision of feedback in the communication channels "student-lecturer", "student-student", "student-electronic dean's office".
  The effective organization of distance learning largely depends on the smooth operation of the communication channels, through which the traditional teaching is able to make a smooth transition to the e-learning environment, establishing constant contact with the main stakeholders of the educational process (faculty, student groups, university administration, etc.).
 In our opinion, one of the important processes of online learning management is the evaluation of online learning.
  In this regard, it is necessary to develop online assessment criteria, through which it will be possible to evaluate the student's learning more objectively.
  These criteria may include homework assessments, situational problems, group discussions, tests, and online exam assessments.
 .
