The problem of a person's behavior equipped with defense mechanisms is found everywhere. It is relevant in the fields of both clinical psychology and social and developmental psychology, and is presented in both theoretical and applied psychology.
 In the modern psychological discipline, the concept of defense mechanisms is presented in one way or another by researchers representing different psychological schools and directions [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
 Studies show that psychological protection provides subjective adaptation to all types of stress (Z. Freud, A. Adler, E. Erickson, R. Lazarus, R. Plutchik, F. V. Vasilyuk, L. D. Demina, A. Nalchajyan, R. Plutchik, The conclusions put forward in the results of the above-mentioned video-methodological researches become more urgent for the population of the border area in terms of raising and examining the systemic issues of psychological protection, as well as formulating the principles of self-realization and national self-consciousness.
 The population of Artsakh has been chosen as a target for the study of psychological protection mechanisms.
  The experimental research was conducted in 2 stages. The first stage was implemented in 2015-2016, and the second stage in 2017-2018.
  The electorate of the survey participants was 4707 people, of which (represented by regional centers) 805 people in Stepanakert region, of which 462 participated in the first stage of the survey, and 443 - in the second stage, in Martuni region - 680 people, of which 341 people took part in the first stage of the survey, and 339 - in the second stage, 720 people in the Martakert region, of which 368 took part in the first stage of the survey, and 352 - in the second stage, in Hadrut. 752 people in the region, of which 383 took part in the first stage of the poll, and 369 in the second stage, 655 people in the Askeran region, of which 321 took part in the first stage of the poll, and 334 - In the 2nd round, in Karvachar region - 402 people, of which 184 took part in the 1st round of the poll, and 218 - in the 2nd round, in Berdzor region - 231 people, of which 122 took part in the 1st round of the poll and 109 in the second round, 462 people in Shushi region, of which 225 participated in the first round of the poll.and 237 in the second stage.
 The electorate of the survey participants was divided into three age groups: 1st group: 18-29 years old (1st stage: Group A, 2nd stage: Group D) 2nd group: 30-59 years old (1st stage: Group B, 2nd round - Group E) 3rd group - over 60 (1st round - Group C, 2nd round - Group Z).
 The aim of the research is to describe and comprehensively analyze the peculiarities of the manifestation of the mechanisms of psychological protection of the population of the border zone.
 Experimental part In the article we have separated the answers of the participants of the experimental research according to age and chronological features.
  The data presented in the form of a table were received by R. Plutchik-H. Thanks to the methodical toolkit of Kellerman "Lifestyle Index".
  Below are the percentages of expression of psychological defense mechanisms according to the above characteristics (Table 1).
 Table 1. Percentages of expression of defense mechanisms according to age and chronological features, 1st stage. 1st stage. 1st stage. 18-29 years 30-59 years 60 and above Group A Group B Group C Projection Denial Stages 2nd round. 18-29 years Group D 2nd round. 30-59 years Group E 2nd round. 60 and above Group F Extraction 30 3 7 23 13 18 Rationalization 2 38 25 4 49 34 Reaction 5 12 17 6 ​​8 9 Regression 8 4 8 19 2 4 Compensation Transfer 1 29 19 3 21 12 As shown in Table, Group A responses predominate projection and expulsion rates, which are characteristic of post-war youth, given the overwhelming impact of stressful conditions and the non-constructive picture of the defense mechanisms revealed in young people.
  Note also the fact that all other defense mechanisms are relatively homogeneously distributed, except for the low level of denial, rationalization and compensation mechanisms.
 The dynamics of the answers recorded in the same age group in the 2nd stage (Group D) is also significant.
  Here, although we notice a slight decrease in projection and emission levels, from 43% to 35%, and, respectively, from 30% to 23%, the non-constructive attitude towards the environment remains largely dictatorial.
  In the second chronological phase, which, as we know, covers the years 2017-2018, a significant increase in regression was evident among young people, which is due to the gradual weakening of the previous two types of mechanisms, as a result of which the levels of manifestation of all other mechanisms have not changed.
 The indicators registered in the 1st stage of group B (30-59 years old) showed the following picture (Table 1).
  The levels of expression of rationalization and compensation appeared in a dominant position, with a slight priority of rationalization.
  This picture was most vividly expressed among people aged 40-55, which gives a promising idea about the reinterpretation of the modernity of defense mechanisms in this period.
  Let us also mention the rather pronounced positive dynamics of the significance of reactive formation.
  This picture can be explained by the psychological perceptions of the socio-political situation in the border area "without war, without reconciliation", which were also confirmed during interviews collected in the same years. Modernization of a positive, national-consolidating attitude towards state structures.
 The indicators registered during the second stage are also worth commenting on.
  In the same age group (Group E) the expression of defense mechanisms has undergone some changes.
 If the 30-59 year olds of group B showed the activity of predominantly rationalization and compensation mechanisms, then the same age electorate of group E was presented with the following dynamics.
  The indicators of the rationalization mechanism were strengthened, increasing from 38% to 49%.
  Instead, the compensation mechanism gradually began to lose its significance, which was also reflected in the corresponding percentage of registrations, falling from 29% to 21%.
  The role of reactive formation in the psychological defense system was also weakened.
  A disturbing fact was also registered with the increase of the ejection index for that age group.
  This indicates a strategy of de-awareness of risk and dangerous factors or expulsion to the unconscious due to prolonged stay in stressful conditions.
 As for the indicators of group C, it is necessary to present the destructive assessments.
  That is, the results registered in the age group over 60 show not only the gradual weakening of the mechanisms of rationalization and compensation, but also the remarkable activation of almost all the other 45 indicators.
  Let's also add the fact that the outflow rate continues to increase in Group Z (persons over 60 in the 2nd stage).
  Although this tendency is explained by the amorphous perceptions of the socio-political situation in the post-war years, it is nevertheless presented by the predominance of social-psychological and personal peculiarities of the disabled age group.
 Let us now present the dynamics of psychological defense mechanisms separately (Figures 1-8).
  The presented numerical data were obtained as a result of averaging the answers of the electorate, which are presented in Table 1 with their percentages.
 Figure 1. Average data on the expression of the projection defense mechanism As can be seen from the figure in Figure 2, the manifestation of the projection psychological defense mechanism in the border zone is characterized by a chronologically decreasing tendency within each age group.
  The exception is the group of 30-59 years old, where in both the 1st and 2nd stages the projection was manifested in a passive and shaded position.
 Figure 2. Average data on the expression of the defense mechanism of the denial of reality Figure 2 presents the relatively stable expression of the defense mechanism of the denial of reality, both chronologically, within age groups, and among almost all age groups.
  The functional feature of this mechanism is that it showed a rather low level of modernity, except for the data of more than 60 people in the second stage.
 In other words, the studied electorate has a realistic view of reality.
  The reason should also be seen in the fact that the Armenians of Artsakh live in the border area, where it is difficult to ignore the destabilizing consequences of the post-war period, the danger of resumption of hostilities, the "always ready" volunteer forces conditioned by that danger, the uncertain political atmosphere.
 It is also an interesting fact that the presence of the mechanism of denial of reality in the form of high percentage data was registered only in the second stage, in the elderly, who present the above-mentioned destabilizing threats as hidden and as a result of denial or distortion of reality reveal "without 47 wars, without reconciliation". their negative attitude and attitudes towards the situation.
 Figure 3. Average data on the expression of the expulsion defense mechanism Figure 3 presents the dynamics of the expulsion psychological defense mechanism by age and time.
  It is noteworthy that the highest rate of expulsion mechanism refers to the first stage of the post-war period, which was expressed among the youth.
  This period is most affected by the negative consequences of social, psychological, economic, political and demographic changes after the war, which leave their mark on the structure of a person's identity and contribute to the destructive development of a person's socialization at a young age.
  Graph 3 makes it possible to make another conclusion as well. In the adult stage of stage 1, the functional significance of the expulsion protection mechanism decreases sharply.
  It is slightly active only in the age group over 60.
  However, an interesting picture is created when comparing the two chronological stages.
  As we can see, within the 2nd stage, compared to other age groups, people aged 18-29 also show the highest indicators, although they differ from the same age group of the 1st stage by a decrease in intensity.
  And in the following age groups, the gradual modernization of the expulsion mechanism is almost repeated, expressed by a slight increase in the indicators of that protection mechanism.
  This picture allows us to make the following conclusions. 1. In case of emergency situations, the mechanism of psychological protection of expulsion is more relevant among the youth. 2. The urgency of the expulsion mechanism in the border area continues to be maintained among young people even in the conditions of relative stabilization of social and state institutions (Phase 2 of the study), but with a weaker manifestation.
  Therefore, we can state the negative correlation between the strengthening of the statehood and the functional modernization of the expulsion mechanism as a result of the stabilization of democratic institutions among the youth. 3. The importance of the ejection mechanism in the second (30-59 years old) and third (60 and older) age groups, being at a rather low level from the beginning, shows a tendency to grow over the years.
  This phenomenon reveals the possibilities of ejection cumulation under appropriate environmental conditions and can be explained by the fact that in the post-war transition period, when state-building traditions have not yet been formed and individual mobilization potential remains relevant, the ejection mechanism is not a sufficient psychological protection.
  It becomes more necessary when the external conditions become more secure, when the foundations of viability are linked to the functions of democratic institutions, weakening the individual mobilization potential, as a result of which the awareness of the possible danger is expelled and neutralized. 4. In both time phases, the expression of this mechanism is lower compared to the group of young people, which is due to the fact that other defense mechanisms are more active in these groups, which hinder the accumulation and reproduction of ejection.
 Figure 4. Average data on the expression of the defense mechanism of rationalization Figure 4 shows the features of the psychological defense mechanism of rationalization.
 The functional manifestations of this mechanism can be considered as a contrast to the previous ejection mechanism.
  In contrast to the expressions of the expulsion mechanism, here we see the minimum level of application of rationalization at a young age, which is maintained in both chronological stages.
  The electorate of 3059-year-olds from the first stage already shows a rather high degree of rationalization, which shows a tendency to cumulation in the chronological second stage.
  Taking into account the most important feature of this stage, as the achievement of stability of peace in the border zone and the visibility of state-building activities, the active role of the psychological defense mechanism of rationalization can be considered as a constructive, sociometric defense mechanism.
 Let us mention another circumstance: in the third age group there is almost the same high expression of rationalization, with the image of a certain mitigation of the functional significance typical of that age.
 50 Figure 5. Average data on the expression of the reactive formation defense mechanism The data obtained in Figure 5 are also remarkable.
  The expression of this defense mechanism can be distinguished, first of all, according to chronological phasing.
  In the first stage, we see an uneven distribution of reactive formation in different age groups, from the lowest indicators among young people to the sharp increase in indicators registered among the second and third age groups.
  This picture completely coincides with the strategy of overcoming the unprecedentedly difficult social-psychological and personal problems specific to those groups in the post-war period.
  We see a drastic change in the modernization of this mechanism in the second stage of the study.
 The gradual and incomplete change of external conditions towards stabilization and state-building is accompanied by a sharp decrease in the applicability of reactive formation.
  It is interesting that we see this tendency in adults and the elderly.
  Among young people, there is a tendency to activate the mechanism of reactive formation, albeit slightly, but nevertheless.
  This level of activation remains almost unchanged in the other two age groups.
 Figure 6. Average data on the expression of the regression defense mechanism Figure 6 presents the average indicators of the regression psychological defense mechanism.
  Taking into account the generally low indicators of the functional significance of this mechanism, we can confidently state that the regression mechanism does not mainly reflect the psychological protection needs of the population of the border area.
  The only exceptions are the indicators registered in the second stage among the youth.
  It is a disturbing fact that such a development of regressive reactions is observed in this age group.
  Although this tendency can be presented as a purely age-specific feature of socialization, we believe that the accumulation of the modernization of the regression defense mechanism over the years is completely correlated with the content and structural features of the youth value system.
 Figure 7. Average data on the expression of the compensatory protection mechanism The figures in Figure 7 present the details of the manifestation of the psychological protection mechanism of compensation.
 That is, the most disturbing result was that in both chronological stages the compensation was least valued among the youth.
  As for the interpretation of the results obtained through Figure 7, it should be noted that in both phases of the study, the presence of rather high rates in the second and third age groups, with a tendency to a certain decrease in the manifestation of compensation in the elderly.
  It is noteworthy that high rates of compensation were recorded at the very beginning of the post-war period, pointing out the constructive role of this mechanism in overcoming the stressful situation.
  It is also characteristic that in the period of relative stabilization of the socio-economic and political situation of the Artsakh Republic the functional significance of compensation weakens accordingly.
  This conclusion is the basis for important methodological and practical conclusions aimed at the modernization and evaluation of constructive mechanisms of adaptation in both emergency situations for young people and the elderly, and for the implementation of appropriate psychological work.
 Figure 8. Average data on the expression of the displacement defense mechanism Figure 8 interprets the dynamics of displacement significance at different stages of the study.
  As can be seen from the graph, the first age group differs sharply from the other groups.
  Although in the second chronological phase we notice a certain devaluation of the transfer mechanism among young people, nevertheless the role of this mechanism remains very important and topical for young people.
 In the other two age groups we find more relaxing expressions. The role of the relocation mechanism is somewhat influential in the first phase, which decreases in the second phase as the value system of the border area population becomes more visible.
  Along with the deepening of the state-building process, the devaluation and neutralization of the defense defense mechanism become obvious.
 Now we present the summative indicators of the expression of psychological defense mechanisms as a result of SPSS software computer-mathematical analysis (Table 12.).
 54 Table 2. Summary of the expression of psychological protection mechanisms Projection Denial Extraction Rationalization Reaction Compensation Transfer Amount 6 Note. St. Deviation% vs. amount% total As shown in Table 2, projection, rationalization, expulsion and compensation are more pronounced than the psychological protection mechanisms studied among the population of the border zone of the Artsakh Republic.
  This result was reinforced by the statistical correlation of pair defense mechanisms (Table 3).
 Table 3. Pair of statistical interrelationships of psychological protection mechanisms Pair 1 Pair 2 Projection Rationalization Extraction St. error note Note 6 St. Deviation Pair 3 Compensation Reaction 14.17 Pair 4 Regression Denial 7.50 Transfer 5.33 6 2.582 1.054 The following pair of mechanisms are singled out in Table 3: projection-rationalization, expulsion-compensation, reactive formation-regression-displacement in reality negation.
 The basis for the division of the pairs of mechanisms was the numerical comparability of their averaged expressions and their being in about 55 cluster groups.
  The numerical expression of these pairs not only reinforces the priority of the first two pairs of mechanisms, but also represents the correlation interactions between their elements.
  The content orientation of the interactions can be seen by the numerical indicators of standard deviations presented in the same table.
  The detailed report of the above correlations is presented below (Table 4).
 Table 4. Correlation between pairs of indicators of psychological protection mechanisms Pair 1 Projection & Rationalization N 6 Correlation -.980 Badge. Pair 2 6 -.955 .003 Extraction & Compensation Pair 3 Reaction & Regression 6 -.277 .595 Pair 4 Denial & Compression 6 .137 .795 As can be seen from Table 4, the most pronounced indicators of negative correlation correlation show projection and projection. -Compensation "pairs of defense mechanisms.
  This proved the hypothesis that the most pronounced psychological protection mechanisms of the population of the border area are rationalization, compensation, expulsion and projection.
  The above also allows us to describe the more constructive role of rationalization and compensation from the pair of defense mechanisms in terms of overcoming stressful conditions in the post-war period and "functional neutralization" of projection and ejection mechanisms.
 In the case of the "Rejection-Transfer of Reality" couple, both a passivity of significance was observed, and in the case of a simultaneous role, a positive correlation.
 Conclusion Compensation and rationalization are more pronounced than positive constructs of psychological protection mechanisms in the border zone, which are described in sociometric terms and are manifested in the context of state-building behavior.
 56 The most pronounced indicators of negative correlation correlation are shown by the pairs of "projection-rationalization" and "extraction-compensation" protection mechanisms.
 In contrast to the expressions of the expulsion mechanism, at a young age we see the minimum level of rationalization and compensation, which is maintained in both chronological stages.
  Considering the most important feature of the second phase of the post-war period, as gaining visibility of peace stabilization and state-building activities in the border area, the active role of the mechanism of psychological protection of rationalization and compensation can be considered as a constructive, sociometric defense mechanism.
 It is noteworthy that high rates of compensation were recorded at the very beginning of the post-war period, pointing to the constructive role of this mechanism in overcoming the stressful situation.
  It is also characteristic that in the period of relative stabilization of the socio-economic and political situation of the Artsakh Republic the functional significance of compensation weakens accordingly.
  This conclusion is the basis for the implementation of methodologically and practically important conclusions aimed at the modernization and evaluation of constructive mechanisms of adaptation in both emergency situations for young people and the elderly, and for the implementation of relevant psychological work.
 .
