From the first half of the twentieth century, metaphor became a special subject of philosophical analysis.
 283 LINGUISTICS The study of metaphors as a linguistic phenomenon is an old tradition, the roots of which go back to the ancient era, while not losing its relevance today.
  Metaphor is currently perceived as an important component of modern cognitive processes, which has its historical basis.
  The phenomenon of metaphor has been examined by thinkers such as Aristotle, Rousseau, Hegel, Cassirer, Quintilian, Demetrius, Cicero, McCormack, J. Searle, M. Black, GN Sklyarevskaya, J. Lakoff, and others.
 The Greek philosopher and scientist Aristotle was the first to address the concept of metaphor in his work.
  He noted. "A metaphor is a name conveyed by gender, type, sex, type, or similarity."
 According to him, metaphor allows "by talking about the real, to connect the impossible with it" [6, p. 24].
 There are different definitions of metaphor.
 In the explanatory dictionary of S. Ozhegov and N. Shvedova we find the explanation of that word. "A kind of tropic (stylistic trick), a hidden pictorial comparison, the perception of an object through another phenomenon, as well as a pictorial comparison in different types of art.
  In Linguistics, the Transitive Use of the Word ”[7, p. 22].
 Metaphor, as a discipline, is still the subject of study by many linguists.
  This is primarily due to the fact that metaphors are the main features of the ethnopsychology of each nation.
  There is still no common opinion in the professional literature on the essential distinguishing features of a metaphor, the limits of the inclusion of a metaphor.
  A final solution to the question of what a metaphor is has not been given yet.
 It should be noted that the instability of determining the boundaries of metaphors, the ambiguity of metaphorical units are due to the multifaceted nature of the definition of metaphors 284 and the lack of stable criteria for distinguishing metaphorical units.
  In recent years, interest in comparative studies of metaphor has grown significantly, as evidenced by the presence of a number of studies.
  They allow to define more precisely the subject, branches and methods of study of these units.
 A number of theories and approaches have been put forward regarding the translation of the metaphor, each of which has viewed the problem from a different perspective.
 According to Dagu, "metaphor is a test that thoroughly tests the translator's abilities" [1, p. 77].
  Fuertes Olivera agrees with this idea. "The translation of a metaphor is problematic, regardless of the chosen approach to the metaphor" [3, p. 5].
 Translating metaphors is quite a difficult task, as it requires a fine knowledge of this or that culture, language, and context.
  The main requirement of translation is the equivalence of the original and translated texts, which is possible if the semantic or pragmatic (pragmatic) transformation is preserved.
  From a translation point of view, metaphorical units are divided into two groups: 1) metaphorical units with equivalents, 2) metaphorical units without equivalents.
  Figurative units sometimes need to be translated, completely changing their pictorial basis.
  This is often done to preserve their expressive nuances and functional-stylistic features.
  The difficulty of translating metaphors also lies in the fact that many of them, being of an emotional nature, belong to a certain verbal style and often have a pronounced national character.
  Among the metaphors containing a national-cultural component, first of all, the metaphorical units can be distinguished, which include a formal and substantive national-cultural component.
 That is, the same concept is manifested in different languages ​​through 285 LINGUISTICS through different images.
  In the case of the translation of formal nationally denoted metaphors, the functional-communicative equivalence of the translation and the original can be achieved in a variety of ways, and the possibilities for translating substantive nationally denoted metaphors are very limited.
 When translating them, in many cases it is necessary to inform the reader about the non-linguistic information related to the metaphor.
 It should be noted that the difficulties that often arise during the translation of metaphors depend on: • the degree of recognition and identification of metaphors in the original text, • the perception of metaphors as a formatted linguistic unit, • the ethnocultural nuances of metaphors unknown to the translator; from the problem of transfer of the basis, in case the corresponding equivalent is missing in the language of translation.
 The metaphors of fiction are different in their syntactic structure, semantic and practical features.
  These factors play a decisive role in the translation evaluation criteria of this or that metaphorical unit.
  The theory of translation of linguistic tricks, which operates under the so-called "law of conservation of metaphor", is based on the stylistic position that the words used in tropes must correspond to each other, as well as correspond in their literal meanings [5, p. 144].
 The diversity of literary texts, the uniqueness of the author's language, create endless opportunities for the study of pictorial means and the means of their expression in the language of translation.
  As a multifaceted and multi-layered phenomenon, as already mentioned, metaphor can pose significant difficulties for translation, as this means of representing language involves evaluative, nominative, and aesthetic combinations. plan based on literal meaning and plan based on direct, figurative and contextual interaction.
  Taking into account the prevalence of translation of fiction, the mentioned problem is very urgent.
 The aim of this research is to study the ways of Armenian translation of metaphors in English fiction based on Oscar Wilde's novel "Portrait of Dorian Gray" and its Armenian translation material (translated by R. Arakelyan).
 The subject of research is the examples of metaphors written from the above-mentioned work and the comparative analysis of their Armenian translated versions.
 The most common methods of translating metaphors, the most common mistakes and omissions, and possible ways to eliminate errors are revealed.
 The main goal includes the solution of the following problems: փոխ Analysis of sentences containing metaphors in Oscar Wilde's novel "Portrait of Dorian Gray"; հայտնաբեր Identification and formulation of the main tasks and problems faced by the translator during the Armenian translation of metaphors;
 During the research, the methods of general extract, linguistic analysis, comparative-comparative, as well as statistical methods were used.
 Wilde's language stands out with its vivid imagery, which found its vivid expression in his work "Portrait of Dorian Gray".
  In an effort to give his language more expressiveness and originality, Wilde used a number of stylistic tricks.
  It is obvious that metaphor plays an important role in the creation of imagery.
  Stylistic tricks 287 Examples of the use of LINGUISTICS and, in particular, metaphor can be found mostly in descriptive scenes (nature, house, people, etc.), which is not surprising, as the variety of natural objects and phenomena, their colors and forms stimulates human pictorial thinking.
 The combination of the original sentences and their Armenian translations shows that the translator mainly managed to preserve and convey the imagery by combining a number of translation skills.
 Ստեղծագործ In this work there are mainly extended metaphors, which makes the translator face more difficulties.
 ։ As for the tricks used, we find equivalents, grammatical and verbal transformation, compensation, concretization or generalization, descriptive and explanatory tricks, etc.
 ։ It should be noted that the translator has mostly done semantic translation, trying to preserve the aesthetic value of the fictional text, the imagery, which must be perceptible to the Armenian reader.
  For example, Suddenly a ray of hope ignited in the brain.
  (8, p. 229) The above-mentioned metaphor is a translation with verbal transformation, where the adjective "wild hope" has been replaced by the adjective "ray of hope", which is more perceptible for the Armenian language thinking.
  It should be noted that after such a transformation, it would be more correct to replace the word "brain" with the word "heart", as it is more common in Armenian to say "a ray of hope flashed (" woke up ") in the heart."
  It should be noted that the most successful translation became possible as a result of combining some of the translation tricks, that is, the word transformation is often combined with other tricks.
 288 LINGUISTICS Successful translation by means of concretization and contextual translation can be considered as the following example: golden dust particles gleamed in the oblique rays of the sun penetrating through the door.
  (8, pp. 34-35) As we can see, there was a grammatical change in the translation.
  The phrase "The dust was golden" was translated as "golden dust", where there is a specificity - dust-dust.
  The verb "To dance" (translate, spin, jump, slide) is translated as "sting", which means to jump for joy.
  Taking into account that we are talking about golden dust grains, in this context, in addition to the above-mentioned meaning, one of the figurative meanings of the verb "shine" has also been realized - "to shine, to shine, to shine".
 In the next example under study, the translator also combined a number of tricks. The evening twilight enveloped the room.
  The murky shadows with silver legs crept in from the garden.
  All the shades were slowly fading.
  (8, p. 130) To avoid literal translation, the metaphor "The evening darkened in the room" has been translated with the context equivalent of "The evening darkened the room", which is a successful version.
  The second sentence is also translated with grammatical changes.
  The metaphor of "Noiselessly the shadows crept in" was translated as "silently creeping in", where "noiselessly" was translated with the adjective "silent", creating a suffix.
  Here we also see an example of a literal translation - "silver legs", which, in our opinion, can be missed.
  Referring to the third sentence of the above passage, it is done literally, and the meaning of 289 LINGUISTICS is not very comprehensible.
  It is possible to suggest the following option: "All objects were slowly fading" or "The colors of all objects were slowly fading / fading".
  In some cases, the translator made a stylistic change.
  (8, p. 112) Although the translation was made with a change of stylistic ability, it can still be said that the metaphor of "the sky hollowed itself into a perfect pearl" was successful by comparing "the sky was like a magnificent pearl".
  Sometimes when translating the author's metaphor into English, the translator received an outdated metaphor in the Armenian version, which reduced the imagery of the original and did not convey the peculiarities of the author's pictorial thinking and worldview.
  It should be noted that ontological metaphors were also used, for example, Blood hit his face, his cheeks turned red.
  (8, p. 79) It should be noted that in English we are dealing with an author's metaphor, while the Armenian version "Blood hit the face" is an outdated metaphor, which reduces the image of the original and does not convey the peculiarities of the author's pictorial thinking and worldview.
  The translation of the part of the sentence "A rose shadowed her cheeks" is an example of deconstruction.
 ։ In several instances, the translator omitted the metaphor of any part of the sentence based on the Russian translation, which, however, was not justified and led to the loss of the original image.
  For example: 290 LINGUISTICS The room was flooded with the bright rays of the morning, the strange shadows fled back to the dark corners.
  (8, p. 114) As we can see, in the first part of the sentence the translator changed the grammatical subject and used the concretization and descriptive tricks (dawn-dawn, dawn -> bright rays of tomorrow), providing an adequate translation.
  Due to the change of the subject in the first part, the subject of the second part was also changed.
  Interestingly, the translator omitted the metaphor for the last part of the sentence ("where they lay shuddering"), which is based on the Russian translation: did not and led to the loss of the original image.
  It could be translated: "the shadows fled back and trembled in fear in the dark corners."
 ։ The examples where the English original is inferior to the Armenian in its imagery are also interesting.
 In this example, unlike English, the Armenian sentence has a figurative meaning.
 They are not destined to feel the joy of victory, but instead they are free from the bitterness of defeat.
  (8, p. 10) In Armenian there is the expression "joy of victory", while in English only the noun "victory".
  The translator used the method of adding word units to create an image, which was done with the word "delight", which led to the intensification of the image.
 The phrase "knowledge of defeat" has been translated as "bitterness of defeat".
  This example can be analyzed from three perspectives.
  1. The realization of a bad, negative phenomenon causes bitterness and pain in an individual.
  That is why the translator translated the word "knowledge" as "bitterness".
  2. At the beginning of the sentence the noun "delight" was added, so in this case the word "knowledge" 291 LINGUISTICS replacing the word "bitterness" is justified, a contrast was created between the words "delight" and "bitterness".
  3. In addition, we have the phrase "the bitterness of defeat" in Armenian, therefore the translator used a contextual translation with a word transformation.
 Thus, it should be noted that it is noteworthy that although from the point of view of preserving the content, image and expression of the original, there are more losses in the case of mediated translation, in this case we see the exact opposite. The translation mediated by R. Arakelyan is successful from the point of view of preserving the figurative image and expressiveness.
 In general, taking into account the problem of preserving the metaphorical image, three groups of metaphorical translations can be distinguished.
  The first group in the novel "Portrait of Dorian Gray" consists of the metaphors that have been translated, preserving the image (77.5%).
  The second group includes metaphors that have been translated by image substitution (20%).
  The third group includes the metaphors, during the translation of which the translator refused to preserve the original means of expression, applying for deconstruction or compensation (2.5%).
 The analysis of the studied examples also showed that according to Newmark, dead metaphors are most often translated, and the degree of translation of authorial metaphors depends on the proximity of the language systems involved in that process [2, p. 48-49].
 The combination of the original texts and their Armenian versions clearly shows that there is no definite comprehensive model during the translation that would solve all the problems faced by the translators.
  It is obvious that in each case the translator is not faced with the task of choosing one of several ready-made versions, but of the need to find a creative way out of the linguistic situation from the point of view of preserving the content, image and expression of the original.
 .
