Let us discuss the problematic issue in Armenian classical philology, how the Greek-Armenian author Marab Mtsurnatsi, based on the example of a Greek source, compiles the list of Armenian ancestors, adapting it to the "ethnological" list of humanity.
  It is true that we have only one source for the discussion of this issue, the History of Khorenatsi, but that is enough if we can separate the interpretive or other additions of the latter from Marab's words.
 First, before using the History of Marab, Khorenatsi brings the list of the descendants of the common ancestor Adam to Noah, according to S. Book (I. D).
  Then he indirectly complains that S. The book ("I openly cut myself into a Sepahic nation, a way out of those who seem to be despised and despised by the unworthy, from whom we begin to preach, how much is the capacity, as you have found in the ancient stories, with us partly completely useless" 1) She gives the list of Sam's children, so she adds the genealogies of Ham and Habet, based on reliable sources.
  The main proof of their truthfulness is the equal number of names in each of them (10 each, translated by St. Malkhasyants. "Especially since the Holy Book, separating its own as its own nation, left others as despicable and unworthy to be mentioned in words) ).
  Starting from this, we will talk about how much potential there is, as we have found in the ancient stories, which is not at all useless for us ”([1], p. 21).
 171 From Shem to Abraham, from Ham to Nineveh, from Japheth to Aram, though the 10th Aram coincides in time and content with the 9th Ninos, because, as it is said, their years are uncertain).
 These lists are followed by Khorenatsi's sourceological corrections, according to which Sam's grandson Cainan and Habet's grandson Tiras are remembered by all chroniclers, Metsraim as Ham's grandson is not remembered by any chronicler, although S. The book puts the last two in different places.
  And all three are listed as grandchildren by an Assyrian chronicler.
  As Khorenatsi writes. "But in this way you found him in the memory and reading of one of the Assyrians, and he believed what we were told" (I. E).
 The wushim Assyrian is not Mar Abbas Katina, as some thought, but Andreas chronicle.
  This identification was also noticed by R. Vardanyan, deciding that Andreas's case was translated into Armenian in 429-35. ([2], p. 82).
 Then it was the turn of the patriarchs of certain nations to be descended from Noah's grandchildren, whom Khorenatsi considered a "difficult and arduous" work, "an even more inventive ministerial birth to the son of Noah" (I. E).
  But the historian is able to do that job as well and surprise the reader.
  As accurately commented by St. Malkhasyants, Khorenatsi succeeded, even though S. By deviating from the book, bring Hayk and Bel closer together in time, making them 5th and 4th in their lists, respectively, and then make Ninos and Aram modern so that they do not contradict the further story ([1], pp. 461-462).
  Here, Khorenatsi considers the time combinations Bel-Hayk and Ninos-Aram to be indisputable, because he tells about it "in the end of his faithful Abiodenos" (I. E).
 And he brings the Chaldean lists from Ninos to Bel, and from Aram to Hayk, the Armenian seven names (not counting Ara), explaining in front of Hayk, "that there was an opposite Bela" and attributing all that to the trustworthy Abydenos. "And this is what Abydenos says to us in his private ethnography, which then some people will carry on" (I. E).
  It turns out that Abydenos wrote about it in a separate small ethnographic history, which some have eliminated and have not reached us.
  And so that the sudden dive of the mentioned source does not seem suspicious to the reader, he refers to another Greek historian Kepalion.
  According to the latter, such a thing is possible, because at the beginning of his work he began to write down all the small ethnologies from the royal divans, but received a royal order to leave the memory of 172 insignificant and bad people and mention only the brave, wise and worldly ancestors.
 It is true that the reference to Kepalion is a bit indirect (cf. [3], pp. 61, 65), but Khorenatsi could have used it for his purpose, especially since he could not have seen the lost work of Abydenos.
  Of course, any false information can be supported by another reliable and valid judgment, according to the ancient historical tradition, and it is not alien to Khorenatsi either.
  It was also customary to validate the forgery with another false testimony, but in the absence of a valid justification, there was no need to corroborate the authentic information with another forgery.
  In any case, where does Khorenatsi get the hypothesis of Abiudenos, if not from his direct ethnographic source, the History of Marab Mtsurnatsi ([3], about Abiudenos, pp. 53-58).
  After all, Marab works in the same way as Beros, Bazmavep, Abiudenos, and other philosophers.
  Just as they translated the Chaldean ethnographic stories from Chaldean into Greek (Eusebius describes Abydenos' work as the story of the Chaldeans) and added the ancestors of their famous nations, so Marab added the Armenian ethnography to the existing sources.
  Educated Armenians, up to S. Finding their place in the universal structure of the book, they had to fit into the older system.
  It was the myth of the flood and the tower building, the center of development and spread of which was Babylon.
  That is why the universal genealogical and ethnographic lists are of Babylonian origin.
  The genre of ethnography gradually spread everywhere from Babylon and especially flourished in the era of Macedonian globalism, Hellenism, giving birth to new local versions and applications.
  Ethnography also became a benevolent ideology for international trade and soon took the form of books in small and large royal libraries.
  Khorenatsi correctly understood the essence of Marab's ethnographic history when he was transferred to BC. II century and sent him to the imaginary archives of Nineveh to use the Mesopotamian manuscripts, which were supposedly translated and put together in a Greek book, commissioned by Alexander the Great.
  Everything is invented in the language of the symbols of the era, except that Marab is an learned philosopher like Beros or Abiudenos.
  However, unlike his authoritative Greek predecessors, as well as his older contemporary Abiodenos, Marab does not ignore petty ethnography173 and emphasizes it by uttering a word that logically and psychologically could only be said by the first "ethnographer" and historian. "For though we are small, and mighty in number, weak in strength, and mighty in power, yet many have found work done in our world, and worthy of the remembrance of which none of them is worthy of remembrance. to take the manuscript ”(I. 3).
  And indeed, Khorenatsi had to bring Marab Mtsurnatsi to the arena in his two before giving his name.
  Following the example of Abydenos, when Marab was compiling his ethnographic list, he first had to try to get Hayk and Bell, who were in conflict in the cowboy oral novel, and then Aram and Ninos (dictated by Ara) to appear in parallel positions in the respective lists.
  If Bell is ranked 7th above Ninos (10th), it means that he is the 4th after Ham, which in turn means that Abudenos indirectly prompts to consider Hayk at least the 5th generation after Habet, so that they become modern to each other.
  In this case, it is assumed that Marab referred to Abydenos as a reliable source and listed the list of seven Armenian names.
  And this is enough for Khorenatsi, a follower of the same "historiographical" school, to attribute the Armenian list to Abydenos or to perceive Abudenos as the author of the Armenian ethnographic series together with the Chaldean.
  But seeing that the Chaldean list later reached Eusebius, and there is not even a trace of the Armenian, Khorenatsi compulsorily invented a plausible reason for the loss of small ethnicities, referring to the authentic Kepalion2.
 But let us follow Khorenatsi's account of how he combines ancient and biblical traditions about the sons of Noah-Xissutres.
  It is clear that Marab comes from the ancient pagan tradition, and Khorenatsi comes from the other.
 The first mentions Berosyan Sibylla, as we will soon be convinced, calling her beloved and fair through Marab. "Before the pyramid, he said, and to be pluralistic of the people of the nation of voice, and to follow the navigation of Kisutrea's Hays, the philological debates on this issue, with a convincing refutation of well-known views and asserting one's own opinion, see in Aram Topchyan's work" [3], p. 55-63).
  A. Topchyan's point of view will be strengthened if he admits that foreign sources mention Armenians in their lists at the level of an Armenian eponym-ancestor and nothing more.
 174 Zruan and Titan and Japheth were the rulers of the earth ”(I. 6).
  And immediately goes on to reconcile it with the biblical tradition. "For I thought Shem, Ham, and Japheth" (I. 6).
 Philologists have repeatedly mentioned that the name Yapostoste also includes the Greek conjunction (ze), which is placed after one of the listed names, somewhat intensifying the preposition and the conjunction (cf. [1], St. Malkhasyan's ed., P. 462 -463, [3], p. 61).
  Khorenatsi placed the scriptural form Jabet in front of Yapostoste, by which he indirectly showed that he had paid attention to the mentioned name, therefore the personal name was distorted by the one who used the Greek manuscript without separation, as the conjunction ze was perceived as the end of the word.
  At the same time, it can be seen that not only the Greek scholar Khorenatsi, but also Marab Mtsurnatsi could not be the author of that wrong reading, because he wrote in Greek, quoting from Berosyan Sibylla.
  So the false version of the name Yapetos was born by an Armenian translator, and the translator, misreading "Yapestos" in Greek, first perceived it as a complete name, then transcribed it in his own way - Yapostos, perhaps to repeat the biblical "Jabet" in his mind, maybe in his dialect. or for some other unknown reason.
  In any case, Khorenatsi maintains the same version of the translator, even though he would not be unfamiliar with the name of one of the Greek titans, Japetos.
 Means: Marab's song V c. Has it been translated into Armenian?
  We will try to find out by moving forward.
 Shortly after, when Zrvan seized the two brothers by force, Khorenatsi quotes Marab, taken from Sibylla. "... Titan and Japheth resisted him, provoking him to battle in battle" (I. 6).
  Their sister Astghik intervenes in the fight, and they make a condition that King Zrvan's children will not be killed like the previous two, but will be removed to the western Mount Olympus, which they called Dutsenkets.
 Here is the trace of the translator II: Astghik and Dutsenkets.
  Khorenatsi, of course, could have translated the name of the goddess Astghik himself, but perhaps it would have been expressed in style, saying only in Greek or first in Greek.
  In the case of Olympus, it must first be said that the meaning of "friend" may be derived from the root of that word, but here it is translated according to the epic etymology (dits + friend).
  It is felt that the original appeared in translated form under Khorenatsi's hand, which was followed by Khorenatsi's addition. "Now, no one else, though my myth, though considered the truth, but as I believe, 175 many are true" (I. 6).
  If Khorenatsi had used the motive of dragging Zrvan's children to the mountains as the basis for the Armenian translation of Olympus, Dutzenkets, he would not have said what he said, that regardless of the opinion of others, they are largely true.
  He gives this assessment from a kind of neutral position as a third party.
 And in confirmation of his opinion, he refers to Epiphanes the Cypriot song "Rebuke of the Cursed".
 Then Khorenatsi presents the local-folklore echoes of the ancestor Sim (= Zrvan) in the folk etymology of the toponyms Sim, Taron, Tsronk and Zarevand.
 In the formulation of the beginning and the end of that passage there is a change of tone ("But we owe it to the old conversation of some of them to be told ...") or the use of a kind of borderline, concluding style ("And such a conversation is false or indeed full of us no matter what ... »).
  Finally, it is important to note that Khorenatsi mentions only Taronashkharik legends in that passage, which he, as a native of Taron, should have known well.
  Moreover, one of those stories, Tsronk, would simply be impossible to tell in Greek if a special descriptive-explanatory storytelling style was not used, because it belongs to the so-called "linguistic" storytelling genre.
 Next Khorenatsi is a little carried away by the reconciliation of pagan and biblical information, this time in Chapter 7, then goes on to mention the Parthian kings, where he first mentions the name of the author of his irreplaceable source, Mar Abbas Katina (I.8), who He is the delegate of the Armenian king Vagharshak to the king of the Parthians, Arshak, in order to use the royal records of Nineveh.
  In this situation completely invented by Khorenatsi, Marab Mtsurnatsi is destined to find his main source, Alexander Matyan. "The beginning of which is said to be Zruan and Titan and Japheth."
  With the first sentence quoted from Marab, it turns out that the translator considered the name of Japostest to be legal, and to which Khorenatsi no longer responds.
  The place of Cronus is simply written Zrua, which is very typical for the eastern country and its historian Marab.
  And when people and languages ​​got mixed up after the collapse of the Tower of Babel, one of the participants in the noise was "Hayk Yapostestyan".
  In other words, the Greek conjunction has not only become the end of the word, but also participates in the derivation of the word, which leaves no doubt that it is the result of ignorance and not a sweet state.
  And does not this mean that the translator continues to use the "found" form of his name independently, instead of Habetyan?
  Here, in the absence of other facts, the "mistake" gives us additional information, the new application of which becomes quite "informative".
 Because, if the previous uses were possible in Marab's Greek sentences, as a grammatically regular phenomenon distorted by the translator, then the form used could not have a Greek prefix, so it was written in Armenian by the translator, independently of Marab, probably Marab's Greek "Yapetosatsin Hayk" In front of the name, as in Greek "Titanatsin Bell" in Armenian became Titanian Bell.
 Continuing, Khorenatsi writes: "Now, starting from the same book, I said: Yapostoste, Merog, Sirat, Taklad ", which is immediately followed by Khorenatsi's addition. "Which is Jabet, Gomer, Tiras, Torgom" (I.9), then the continuation of the previous Marabyan enumeration follows, with Khorenatsi's intervention. "After which the same chronicler (Marab Mtsurnatsi - AS) said before. "Hayk, Aramaneak", - and again the words of Khorenatsi, - "and all the others, you said in advance" (I.9).
  That is, it reminds of the previous enumeration up to Aram and Ara.
  The novelty of this quote is that in the Marab name list the form "Yapostoste" appears at the beginning of the series, opening the Armenian "ethnographic" list and listing it up to Aramaneak, referring to what has been said before.
  And what has been said before, it turns out, is attributed to Abydenos (I. 5), which we already suspected during the discussion of Abydenos and attributed to Marab.
 Now let's re-read the last line of Chapter T again. "Now, in the same book (Marabi - AS) I started saying: Yapostoste, Merog, Sirat, Taklad ... After which the same chronicle (Marab - AS) said before. Hayk, Aramaneak, and so on, you said in advance "(I. T.).
  This means that what was said before was also taken from Marab, but was attributed by Khorenatsi to Abydenos, who served as an example for Marab.
 After all this, even being skeptical, one must admit that Marab's word was attributed to Abydenos by Khorenatsi, and that in AD 2nd c. Greek historian Marab Mtsurnatsi Greek History was translated into Armenian in the 5th century by an unknown translator.
 .
