Recently, there has been a great deal of interest in the development of market relations, innovation processes in economics, science, culture and education, both in terms of the content and design features of the overall organization and the organization's image, especially in the socio-cultural sphere.
  The most important task of the organizations is to create a positive internal and external image from 135 GOVERNMENT, its goal is to strengthen and increase its position in the market, to attract new knowledgeable employees, to motivate employees to increase their productivity and work more efficiently.
  The growing attention to the problem of forming a strong image in the organization is not accidental.
  A strong corporate image becomes a necessary condition for the organization to achieve sustainable and continuous practical success.
  It has a very reasonable explanation.
 First, a strong image allows the organization to gain a stable position in the market, which allows setting the desired prices and pursuing a pricing policy.
  Second, a strong image reduces the degree of substitutability of goods, therefore protects the organization from competitors, strengthens its position vis-ապրանքների-vis substitutes.
  Third, a strong image makes different types of resources more accessible to companies.
 The image of the organization is evaluated by the people around, based on their own experience, personal values, universal norms, standards, principles.
  The accuracy of the image evaluation is directly proportional to the depth of knowledge he has, which is formed in that field.
 Also interesting are a number of features of the corporate image, which, according to the American researcher D. Burstin, are actually formed in practice [2].
  We present them below.
 First of all, the image must be synthetic, that is, it must be planned in such a way as to leave a certain impression through its brand, brand, product variety.
 Second, the image of the organization must be accurate, reliable, in order to create trust among people and be associated with a specific organization or person.
 Third, the image must be bright and clear in order to affect people's emotions.
 GOVERNANCE Fourth, it must be clear and memorable.
 Fifth, one of the important signs of the image is its uncertainty, the image must be formed between feelings, expectations and reality, in order to stand in unexpected situations, to resist changes in people's tastes [3,306 c.].
 It is known that every organization goes through four stages during its life. 1. The stage of formation of the organization, which is characterized by a focus on a certain market segment, 2. The stage of strengthening the positions and relatively stable existence, 3. The stage of innovation of the organization, the purpose of which is to expand the market in case of stable positions.
 4. The stage of transformation of an organization, which leads to either destruction (for example, bankruptcy, slow stagnation), or another innovative revolution and rebirth. It is obvious that each stage must have its own image policy, external and (perhaps, first of all) internal, which It is designed to ensure maximum profit at this stage of development and to prepare a "springboard" for the next stage.
  It is clear from the mentioned factors of the image policy that it is characterized by a certain delay, that is, if we start to worry about the image of this stage being in that stage, then we are already late.
 Author of the article "Corporate image - strategic aspect", IV Alyoshina notes that corporate image management, both theoretically and practically, began to be discussed in the United States more than half a century ago.
  As of today, the conceptual approach has been formed in this sphere.
  Below are its main elements. ։ The vision is the organization's vision of the present and future reality.
  Creating a vision is the main responsibility of the head of the organization 137 MANAGEMENT.
  To navigate the ship in the uncertain and volatile market situation, the captain must know where he is sailing.
 ։ Corporate mission is the significant status that the organization seeks, the role of its social significance.
  The mission can be considered as a strategic tool that determines the target market and orients the business or production.
 ։ Corporate originality is the norms of values, judgments and behaviors prevalent in the company, which determine the essence of individual corporate culture.
  Corporate originality is in fact the organization itself, an analogy of a person's personality.
 ։ Corporate identity is what the organization communicates about itself, about its individuality.
  Everything that the organization says, does and creates shapes its identity.
 As we know, the main goal of corporate identity management is to gain a favorable corporate image and customer loyalty.
 In general, the interrelationships of the above concepts can be shown in the form of a diagram (see Figure 1). 138 GOVERNANCE Figure 1. Image Formation Mechanism [5] Login, Corporate Mission Corporate Individuality Corporate Identity Contact Us Corporate Image As mentioned, image is one of the most important characteristics of an organization today and often plays a very important role in its competitiveness and competitiveness.
  Image is a tool, a way to solve problems.
  However, its most important feature is that it is an object of self-government.
 When we talk about the activities of the organization, we must also mention that in carrying out any activity, in the transition to the life stage of any organization, the company must have a certain strategy, goal, chain of actions, deadlines, etc.
 Strategy is the direction of development chosen by the organization.
  Decisions about its type of activity, means and scope, relationships within the organization, as well as its position in the environment, allow the organization to achieve its goals.
 MANAGEMENT The strategy of the organization has a number of tasks, the main of which is the sustainable development of the organization and the main goal - to ensure profit.
  The image of the organization has its absolute influence on these main factors.
 First of all, during the strategy development stage, the organization carries out a comprehensive UTI study and analysis of the company, during which it tries to ensure maximum results due to the use of identified strengths and opportunities.
 The positive image of the organization is one of the strengths of the organization, which can have a greater impact on the consciousness of consumers than, for example, the price of the product.
  On the other hand, the positive image of the organization ensures stable and strong ties with partners, including suppliers, intermediaries, which allows you to enjoy all its benefits, from pricing policy to the speed and quality of services provided.
 If, as a result of the analysis, the current image of the organization is the current weakness of the company, it will affect not only the consumption, which is the main condition of the organization, but also the establishment of reliable relationships with partners.
 When the organization has a positive image, accordingly a stable group of consumers in its market segment and reliable partnerships, the organization's strategy can be aimed at the "aggressive" development and progress of the organization, capturing new markets, penetrating new areas, etc.
 And if the organization has a negative or non-positive image from the point of view of public perception, then the strategy can be "defensive", aimed at revealing the reasons for having a negative image in the market and eliminating them, forming a positive image, and then only development.
 MANAGEMENT The positive or negative image of the organization not only affects the choice of the type of strategy of the company, but also the timing.
 A positive image will allow the organization to implement long-term strategic management, of course, taking into account the changes in the market, internal and external environments.
 The level of image also affects the distribution of the organization's financial resources.
 When the organization has a positive image, the company will invest more financial resources to improve the product or expand production, the introduction of new technology, product quality improvement, product expansion, etc.
 And when the image of the organization is at a low level, the organization has to make large allocations from financial resources to increase its image, including increasing marketing and advertising costs.
 Thus, the image of the organization has a great influence on the choice of the company's strategy, strategic decision-making, approval of strategic directions, deadlines, distribution of financial resources, and therefore the whole strategy.
  Therefore, when developing a strategy, the organization should include the image of the organization and its impact on the actions to achieve the goal set by the strategy of the organization in the main categories studied in the stage of information collection, processing and analysis.
 .
