In the "History" of Agatangeghos, after the conspiracy of Anak Partev, the death penalty is imposed on him and his family.
 The nanny of the family kidnaps one of Anak's two youngest sons, the future Gregory, to neighboring Cappadocia, rescuing him from revenge for the murder of King Khosrov of Arshakun ([1], p. 32).
 In order for Grigor Partev to be expelled from Great Armenia as a child in his arms, he must have been born in 259-260. In the Church Province of Upper Armenia, in one of the families descended from the Arshakuni royal family.
  The family name is not known, and the brother's name was allegedly Suren ([2 [; [3], p. 64 (hmm. [4], pp. 145-146)), which is quite a Parthian feature, unless of course he had a brother. , and if the latter did not appear according to the myth of the twins.
  But since the only evidence of his brother's name comes from a later oral source, it is more correct to think that "Suren" appeared under the influence of Historian Khorenatsi,'s allegedly derived from the Parthian dynasty ([5], pp. 145-146).
 In 259/60, when Persia conquered all of Armenia, including Upper Armenia, many ruling families moved to Lesser Armenia and Cappadocia, and Gregory's family emigrated from Upper Armenia to Caesarea, where he was baptized and named the Pool of Gregory. controlling, spitting, controlling the light, awakening: from this semantic field the Armenian nickname (Lusavorich) seems to be derived.
  Later, according to his Greek "Behavior", he was ordained a priest.
 Judging by the Greek nickname "Agatangeghos" (evangelist), Grigor, probably from Caesarea, visited various provinces with evangelical views, including Bardzr Hayk, when the latter was liberated from the Persians, as well as central Hayk, when in 293/4. it passes to the power of Trdat the Great.
  It is not ruled out that he, as a brave preacher, did agatangeghos in Greater Armenia even before the latter's independence, during the Persian rule.
  In 287, when Tiridates III, with the help of Emperor Diocletian, restored the Armenian throne to the Roman-dominated Small and High Armenia, Priest Gregory returned to his hometown to work as a secretary in the court (Chrmes?).
 It is interesting that according to the preface of Agatangeghos, Agatangeghos himself was also the secretary of the king, which also proves that Grigor and Agatangeghos are the same person.
 There is no need for any evidence to suggest that King Trdat could have known in advance that his cousin was a Christian, and even more so that he was a priest and a traveling preacher (agatangeghos), especially since 287 and in the years that followed, Christians did not have to live a secret or semi-secret life.
  Therefore, the episode in the story of Agatangeghos that Trdat III learned about Gregory's religion while sacrificing to the goddess Anahit in Yeriza should be considered as information introduced at the request of the behavioral genre.
  In fact, it was natural for King Trdat to associate with Christians, to serve in the army, to hold positions, and finally, after the nationalization of the religion, to appoint his Christian cousin as the head of the Armenian Church.
  It is clear that not only the fact that his cousin was a Christian, a priest and an agatangeghos played a role in this, these, by the way, can testify to his popularity and fame, but also the fact that Grigor was skilled and skilled in official and domestic relations. In resolving the obstacles and problems that have arisen, as can be seen from the instructions of "Frequency".
 Gregory, as the head of the church, was to be ordained a Catholicos in a nearby church, in this case in Caesarea, which was close to him from his childhood and youth.
  That is why, with royal honor, accompanied by princes (298-99), he was sent on a business trip to Caesarea over Little Armenia, from where he invited clergymen and church organizers, who were very necessary for the initial period.
  Grigor Lusavorich was able to capture the representatives of the Armenian clergy on the side of the church without sharp clashes, who, 363, joined the first episcopal class together with the clergy from the local early Christian communities.
  And if we add to that the clergy trained in the schools undertaken by Grigor, then the demand for personnel service of the new religion can be considered satisfied.
 And indeed, only by recruiting religious ministers from the above-mentioned four sources was it possible to provide all the Armenian provinces and cities with ecclesiastical life.
  It is known that N. Adonts, summarizing the limited evidence, asserted that initially Gregory the Illuminator's associates were 12 bishops in the organization and leadership of church life, which gradually increased, imitating the ministerial administrative structure of Greater Armenia in the ecclesiastical structure ([6], p. 360).
 Thus, assuming the helm of the Armenian Church at the age of about forty, Catholicos Grigor Partev managed to do a number of important things during his reign.
 a. To establish the rules of permanent worship, liturgy, baptism and other sacraments.
 b. Establish schools in Greek and Assyrian languages: S. Heteroepic (see heteroepic (= in other languages) reading [7], pp. 227-228) to introduce and widely use the translation method by mastering the book.
 c. To create a network of new sanctuaries all over the country, on a pre-Christian basis or in a new way.
 d. Establish a pan-Armenian Christian holiday life in accordance with the Jerusalem calendar and the Christian Easter.
 e. Adopt the rules of Christian congregations and supplement them with local rules.
 f. Send instructions and instructional letters to all dioceses to clarify the issues and problems that have arisen.
 We owe the latter to the mentioned sphere in the activity of Catholicos Grigor for the creation of "Frequency of speeches".
 The great vardapet, answering this and that question with papers written in his works, had no intention and desire to create the above-mentioned collection.
  These letters, although written in Greek, were so popular and authoritative that they were probably brought together and collected as much as possible during the reign of Nerses the Great, or by his order, to form a collection with a conventional title: Greek logo pala 364 sioi (= "Frequency" "speech", which means multiple, multiple, many speeches, and has nothing to do with being read or told often.
 Frequency IV c. It is the brightest expression of the foreign Armenian literature created at the beginning of the 19th century, due to which the life and work, thoughts and words of the great monk come to life and breathe.
 It must be said that Grigor Partev, worthy of his greatness, also received the universal support of a great man, Trdat the Great, in order to successfully crown the great work of church building and to introduce the new religion in the Armenian society.
  It is natural that if it were not for the new political-religious course of Trdat III, Armenia would not have become the first Christian state, Gregory would not have been a church leader, and Christianity would have flourished in Armenia slowly and gradually, as in other places and neighboring Little Armenia and Caesarea. One of the prominent Christian figures, perhaps also the first Armenian theologian father.
  Therefore, it should be noted that he presented himself with his Frequency as a moral guide of the Armenian Church, mainly due to the nationalization of Christianity.
 But this does not mean that there were no disagreements between Trdat and Grigor, especially over the organization of such a serious matter, especially during such a long rule (about a quarter of a century).
  If we take into account that King Trdat converted to Christianity not by force of faith, but by political calculation, and Gregory was brought up as a Christian as a child, then disagreement between them is inevitable, at least because Trdat will treat this issue formally, and Gregory, motivated by convictions.
  In the same way, the king's conduct could be imitated by the princes who had “diplomatically” converted to Christianity and again faced the rebuke of the moralist Gregory and other fathers.
  This is the reason for judging a small part of the "Frequency", which was unjustly attributed to the pen of Mashtots by the majority of researchers (5th century). "And this is known, that it is not the lineage that glorifies God, but the virtue of virtue.
  For there is nothing greater in Armenia than in Persia, than in the people of Arshakunyats, and in the descendants of Abraham, who descended from Abraham, he, and all the nations, kings of the earth according to the invincible lord of all.
  But if they do not wake up for good, they will be more plagued by the Lord; And the servants of those who are pleasing to God, the kings are glorified in the Lord, and those who are responsible for their sins are punished with just justice ”([8], p. 238).
 The quotation shows that the author calls the king to be morally vigilant to live according to the law of Christians, so as not to receive a plague from God.
  Here it is not Mashtots, the translator-editor of the "Frequency" or the supposed author, who intervened to address King Artashes in the 420s, as some well-known Armenologists think, but, as A. noted in his book "Mashtots". Martirosyan, Grigor Partev indirectly apply to Trdat, because the Arshakunis lived in the 5th century. They were already in the shadow of the Sasanians and were not kings of different nations. At the beginning of the 19th century, they still had the reputation of a well-known royal family in Persia, Armenia and other nations ([9], p. 116).
  In addition, S. The reference to the book regarding Abraham as the ancestor of the Arshakunys does not come from the Armenian tradition, but from the broader Middle Eastern and Iranian ideas, which were formed before the Sasanian revolution, in AD In the I-III centuries, during the rule of the Parthian Arshakuns of Iran, probably by Jewish rabbis, merchants or Christian emigrants who diplomatically favored the Parthian kings.
 Thus, next to King Trdat, the role of Catholicos Gregory was also great in overcoming pre-Christian cults and prejudices and rooting Christianity in Armenia almost bloodlessly and without social upheaval.
  Nevertheless, from the XIX-XX centuries until today, they do not stop criticizing Gregory the Illuminator on charges of destroying pagan culture.
 However, it turns out that Gregory Agatangeghos and Trdat the Great were mainly involved in the destruction of ancient temples and cultural values.
  III century In the second half of the twentieth century, the perpetrators of this notorious case were the Persian rulers, who tried to introduce official Zoroastrianism throughout Armenia1.
 Only the fact that an atrushan was built on the place of Bagavan temple, and S. A clay kiln was found at the base of the Mother Cathedral of Etchmiadzin, suffice it to say that the Persians were destroying the former sanctuary for the Zoroastrian shrine, and the Christians were covering the former one to build the sanctuary of the new religion.
  If the Christians had destroyed the temple and the book, the Garni temple would not have been saved, even if it was by a miracle or for an unknown reason. We will address this question in another article.
 He was saved from the Persians by 366 ro, which means that the issue still needs to be examined.
  So far we can say that the Garni temple does not fit in our restored historical-political and cultural context. It should have been either demolished or not built.
  As a hypothesis, we can put forward the provision that the temple was built after the transfer of the rule of Greater Armenia from Persian Nerseh to Helios-Trdat.
  That is, Trdat, crowned by the sun-worshiping Aurelian, managed to complete the construction of the Helios-Mihri temple before the nationalization of Christianity, that is, between 393-99, approximately as many years as required for the Akhtamar temple, 915-921.
  After Christianity, the area of ​​the Garni temple, fortified with walls and isolated from the people, with its baths, palace and other living infrastructures, became a royal resting place and the tomb of Princess Khosrovidukht, as historian Khorenatsi clearly writes (see [5], pp. 241-242). once again confirms his reliability.
 It is clear that as a result of such developments, only the pagan temple could be saved, moreover, it could be justified to leave some parts of the structure, some parts of the decoration incomplete or incomplete, because the act of nationalization of Christianity in 299 had taken place. and Grigor Partev's church-building activities.
 According to the Code, Prior to becoming Catholicos, Priest Gregory was married to Mary, the daughter of David, a Christian from Caesarea, and had two sons, the eldest, Vrtanes, and the youngest, Aristakes.
  It is not remembered whether they had other children, but these two, first the younger and then the eldest, were successors to the Armenian Catholicos after their father.
  It is clear that Vrtanes was named after a family name, perhaps Gregory's father was named Vardan, and his younger son was named after a Greek Christian name.
 Vrtanes did the same in naming his two sons, the clan named Husik, and the Christian Grigoris after his grandfather.
  By the way, it is possible that Husik was the secular name of his grandfather Grigor.
  In the same way, Husik, who called one of his sons by the surname Pope, the other Athanagines (Greek: Immortal), probably S. In honor of Athanasius.
  Then the dynasty of Gregory the Illuminator continued with one child, Nerses from Athanasius, Sahak from this, of whom the only daughter was Sahakanush.
  According to an uncertain information, S. Athanasius was the brother or relative of Gregory's wife, 367, who was martyred during the persecution of Decos (not Diocletian) in Caesarea, which is probably why he was canonized.
  As for Husik's other son, Papi, who was left childless by his official wife, it must be said that according to Pavstos Buzand, he had an illegitimate heir from a concubine in the village of Hatsik, Taron, named Vrik.
  The latter is comparable to the blessed Vardan Karchazat mentioned in Koryun's "Vark Mashtots", who He is the father of Mashtots ([10], p. 79; [11], p. 38).
  If Vartan is Vrik, then Mashtots and Sahak Partev are the grandchildren of two brothers, that is, quite close relatives, which in turn could contribute to their close partnership.
 It is known from the "History of Agatangeghay" ([12], p. 452) that Grigor Partev became a hermit in his native mountains in the last period of his life (in the hermitage called Sepuhi Manya ayrk, according to the folk oral tradition) (no. [13]).
  Of course, in many Armenian provinces they wanted the national saint to suffer and die in their mountains, and the fact that Sepuh became acceptable from so many mountains shows once again that St. Gregory the Great was Armenian.
 Grigor Partev reigned for about 30 years and was buried in his family tomb.
  He IV c. In the second half he was already considered a saint among the masses, but he was canonized by Sahak Partev.
 .
