Matsun is one of the oldest dairy products, which is widely used in Armenia.
  According to the information, the Armenians who emigrated from Armenia took the yogurt with them to Europe, America and spread it among the local population.
  In some European and Asian countries, other sour dairy products are used that are very similar to yogurt, but differ in their taste and smell from yogurt, for example, in Russia - prostokvashan, in Bulgaria - butter, in Central Asia - cumin, in the North Caucasus - kefir, in Algeria, Syria - laba .
 Yogurt is a complete nutrient with its chemical composition, it contains almost all the nutrients necessary for the human body, differing in the amount of milk proteins, fat and lactose, vitamins (A, B, C, D, E) [1].
 Historical studies.
  Armenia is a traditional region of dairy production.
  Dairy products have always had an important significance in the diet of the Armenian people.
  The blood-inheriting ancestors of the Armenians, the Urartians, already knew the methods of making dairy products [2].
 From ancient times Armenia was famous for the abundance and variety of dairy products, about which Xenophon, a participant of the Greek invasion of Armenia, wrote in his book "Anabasis" (V-IV centuries BC).
  At the beginning of our era, Strabo's memoirs dedicated to Armenia speak of the fact that in ancient times Armenians used different dairy products.
 This is also confirmed by cuneiform inscriptions of Assyrian King Sargon (714 BCE).
  According to the Greek historian Herodotus (480-420 BC), Armenian merchants sailed to Babylon, Khorezm, India, China, and other lands, loading melted butter, cheese, squeezed yogurt, and dried buttermilk. -6].
 The sale of dairy products expanded even more when centers such as Old Julfa and Nakhichevan (Armenia) were established.
  They exported dairy products to the Netherlands, Italy, the Middle East, as well as Kievan Rus', as evidenced by the Urartu Citadel (7th century BCE), as well as the Armenian trade near the Red Hill, Dvin, or Volga rivers in Teishebaini. The excavations of the ruins of the settlements, as well as the diploma given to the Armenian merchants by Vladimir Monomakh [2, 7, 8].
 Our people have made lactic acid butter from yogurt since ancient times.
  In earlier times it was also made from oil (this word has Armenian origin, meaning the previous word for oil, it consists of two parts - oil and worm, the suffix "worm" indicates belonging [9]).
  In order to get this food, milk love (fat) was collected in jars, where natural coagulation took place, it was beaten and butter was obtained.
  In the distant past, in the summer pastures of the middle and highlands of the Armenian highlands, butter was obtained from oilseeds.
  To obtain this product, milk cream (arazhan) was collected in clay jars.
  After descending from the pastures, they were beaten with knots and got butter.
  Later they got butter from yogurt.
 The word Matsun is of Indo-European origin, it originated from the word "mag", the c of which changed its sound, was enchanted with ts.
  It is interesting to note that the name matsun originated from the Armenian word matsunel, which means to make paste, which means to coagulate, to melt [11].
  Later, the Georgians borrowed yogurt with insignificant changes - yogurt, the Turks - yogurt, the Greeks - yogurt, the English - speaking people - masol and other names.
  Yogurt is the daily food of Armenians.
  It is made with cow's, buffalo's, sheep's milk or their mixtures.
  Yogurt made with buffalo and sheep milk has a solid composition.
  What is made with sheep's milk is usually leaky.
  The chemical composition of yogurt mainly depends on the chemical components of milk.
  The milk is boiled, cooled to 35-40 ° C, melted at a natural 1.0% level, wrapped and kept in a warm place for 4-5 hours until the level appears, after which it is put in the refrigerator to cool and harden.
  It is used in its natural state, various dishes are also prepared from it, including tanapur, yoghurt, in summer - yoghurt - buttermilk.
  Yogurt is dissolved in water, a little salt is added and used as a refreshing drink.
 To get squeezed yogurt and keep it for a long time, the yogurt is squeezed with a bag made of dense fabric.
  Squeezed yogurt is suitable for transportation to distant places, for medicinal purposes and to receive other dairy products.
  Canned yogurt - gonad yogurt - squeezed yogurt is put in a bag for 3-4 days under heavy objects, well dehydrated, then add butter, mash well, pour into clay pots, keep in a cool place.
  They open it in winter, eat it that way or add water, mix it, mix it to get butter.
  To get yogurt paste, in the fall the yogurt is squeezed for three or four days, dehydrated well, then poured into clay pots and pressed well, a melted oil is added in a thin layer on top.
  Store in a cool place.
  They are usually opened in winter for use.
 To get the tomato, mix the paste obtained in the mentioned way 1.
 1 milk, 1.
 Yogurt in a ratio of 2, squeeze into clay jars, keep in a cool place as canned yogurt.
  To make hokul, they prepare it like tomato, with the only difference that they use fresh cheese instead of buttermilk.
  To get buttermilk, they first make yogurt from cow's milk.
  In the early past it was adorned with leather ticks, later with clay incense burners.
 156 Yogurt and butter, as highly nutritious, useful, healing dairy products, have attracted the attention of both domestic and foreign researchers.
 Mesrop Mashtots, the 5th Catholicos Hovhannes Mandakuni [6], the historian Herodotus (480-420 BC), Hamam Areveltsi, Tsakhketsi (IX century), Grigor Magistros (X) wrote about the healing properties of dairy products. XI century), medieval physicians-scientists Mkhitar Heratsi, Grigoris (XII-XIII centuries), Amirdovlat Amasiatsi and others [13].
  Amirdovlat Amasiatsi described yogurt in detail in his book "Angitats anpet". "It is called sour milk in Armenian, which helps with dysentery, as well as tuberculosis, inflammatory diseases of the liver, eliminates the effect of toxins.
  If we mix it with honey and rub it on the purulent wounds and ulcers of children's mouths, it will help.
  And if we eat sour milk or yogurt, it will help people with strong character and will strengthen sexual desire.
  Cow yogurt whey and its sour milk are good for the stomach, stop diarrhea and whet the appetite, as well as moderate the heat and make the body well-nourished and fat "(translated literally).
 Later, many scientists studied the biological properties of yogurt, the microbiota (bacterium), isolated, differentiated fractions of lactic acid bacteria (Lactobacilli), but to obtain high-quality yogurt with pure bacterial cultures, did not get a stable bacterial level [14-17].
 Therapeutic significance.
  Yogurt has a preventive and curative effect, has been used for centuries in the treatment of intestinal diseases, as a "probiotic" selected during natural evolution, which cleanses the body, treats the effects of drunkenness, eliminates bad breath, smoothes facial wrinkles, raises the body Cleanses the body of toxins, regulates the body's metabolism, reduces the amount of cholesterol in the blood, regulates colitis, intestinal dysfunction, neutralizes the effects of the use of drugs, especially antibiotics, hormonal preparations and the effect of absorption of toxic substances into the blood.
 The study of bacteriological and adhesive properties.
  Various brake substances can penetrate into the milk.
 Among them are. 157- Pesticides - pesticides that destroy plant-based CBDs, which play an important role in the digestion of humans and animals, acidification of vegetables, affect the quantity and quality of dairy products such as cheese, cream, yogurt, lactic acid, lactic acid. coagulation, organoleptic (taste) properties, etc. [18] - antibiotics used to treat infectious diseases of humans and animals, - preservatives used to extend the shelf life of dairy products.
  If preservatives - sorbic acid and its Na, K, K, Ca salts, as well as sulfur dioxide, benzoic acid are used in the drying of fruit oils, dried fruits, then their addition to dairy products for children, fruit juices is prohibited [19], - Nitrates, which pass into milk and are regenerated in the intestines after entering the human body, are called nitrates, nitrites, and nitrosamines.
  Nitrosamines are carcinogenic [21].
  Nitrates are used in the production of cheese - 20 g abroad, and in Russia - 30 g in 100 l of milk.
  They are also used in the processing of vegetables and meat products to prevent the development of pathogenic bacteria.
 One of the aims of the work is to study the bacteriological and adhesive properties of yogurt and to separate the CTBs endowed with high biological properties for use in dairy production and medicine.
 Material and methods.
  We took samples of yogurt from individual farms in the highlands of Armenia: Aragatsotn, Shirak, Gavar marzes and from yogurt producers in the pastures of the same marzes in spring, summer and autumn.
  We used liquid and solid agar media to separate CBs from yogurt.
 We have studied the effect of pesticides, antibiotics and preservatives of different concentrations (Table 1) on the resistance of isolated CBDs.
  We have previously dissolved the mentioned substances in distilled water and transferred them to sterilized milk.
  We sowed with strains of CBDs, fermented at favorable temperatures for the development of CBDs within 1-10 days.
  Then we determined the milk coagulation time (days) and the 158 coagulation acids by 0 T (Turner).
  We measured the size of the bacteria, counted the number of cells and so on.
  We determined the adhesive properties of coagulated milk bacteria using human, bull and sheep blood.
  We have also studied Lactobacillus acidophilus Er. 317/402 "Narine" strain [24].
 The average results are given, the error value of which does not exceed 5%.
 Research results and discussion.
  Microbiological properties of yogurt lactic acid bacteria.
 We took 269 samples of yogurt from different ecological niches of Armenia, isolated 270 rod-shaped and spherical strains of KTBs, from which we selected 70 and identified them.
 It turned out that the ratio of yogurt rod-shaped and spherical KTBs 1.
 2 is.
  10 hours after the reading, that relationship changes. Bacterial bacteria are 3-4 times more numerous than spherical bacteria.
  In the samples of yogurt taken from the northern and middle zones of Armenia, spherical CBDs predominate, and in the samples of the southern warm regions, rod-shaped CBs.
  Sugar mushrooms are found in all samples of yogurt.
  However, it is not found in freshly melted, fresh yogurt.
  The amount of sugar mushrooms is a lot in 2-3 days of yogurt.
  Sugarcane grows quickly in 2-3 days.
  Yoghurt acidity is different at different times.
  Yogurt with 130-140 ° T acid has a solid composition, pleasant taste and pleasant aroma.
  Organoleptic (taste) properties are insufficient during acidification up to 180-240 ° C.
  At 240-350 ° C there are almost no spherical CBs in yogurt.
  There are no obvious differences in the type of yogurts taken from yogurts taken from different ecological conditions in Armenia, as all producers, especially factory producers, take mangoes from high rural areas. Nature is relatively clean, there is almost no inhibitory substances in milk - pesticides or fertilizers, which negatively affect the quality of food and microbiota.
 It turned out that yogurt has a very rich microbiota: spherical and rod-shaped KTBs, lactose-fermenting and non-fermenting sugars, acetic acid bacteria.
  However, to date, in addition to this diversity of composition, it is not clear how quantitative the above-mentioned bacteria are, depending on ecological conditions, seasons, variety of different species, and other circumstances.
 159 Yogurt is a repository of different types of CBDs and sugar cane, which was formed over the centuries, the best types of CBDs have been selected and preserved.
  When we connected the different types of those disconnected KTBs and tried to get yogurt, despite the fact that we got a "yogurt" with a strong taste and smell, but it was very different from the rural yogurt.
  That is why milk processing industries often have to take us from the highlands of the countryside.
  Then we dried many samples of yogurt with the developed technologies [2526].
  After restoring this level, the yogurts did not differ from liquid natural yogurt in their bacteriological and biochemical properties, so we suggested using the dry yogurts obtained in this way in dairy production to be transported to distant places and stored for a long time.
 Unspecified new strains of KTBs endowed with biological, high production properties were separated from Matsun, for which copyright certificates and patents were received.
  These strains are deposited under the numbers 9603-9609 of the Microbiotechnology Center of the National Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Armenia under the numbers 9603-9609 [27].
 The effect of chemical inhibitors on the resistance and adhesive properties of lactic acid bacteria.
 All tested inhibitors affected the durability and adhesive properties of yogurt and yogurt-separated KTBs (Table 1).
  Moreover, yogurt has higher adhesive properties and resistance to inhibitors than KTBs separated from yogurt.
 a) The effect of organic chloride pesticides.
  It turned out that as a result of the influence of Celtic, the ability of CBDs to produce acid decreases (Fig. 1).
  Thus, the 317/402 "Narine" strain of L. acidophilus without celtic milk produced an acidity of 450 0 T, while at a 0.5% concentration of celtan - 72 0 T, and at 1.0% - 48 0 T (The milk did not coagulate).
  At the same time, the duration of milk coagulation has been extended from 6-7 hours to 200 hours (results are not shown).
 Different types of CBDs have been found to have different resistance to crotillin (see Table 1).
  Rod-shaped TBs withstood up to 1.0% of crotillin, and none of the streptococci strains withstood this concentration.
  Crotillin had some effect on the proliferation of CBD cells (results not shown).
  Thus, at 0.5-1.0% crotilin concentrations, the size of streptococci increased from 0.6-1.0 to 0.8-2.0 μm and increased from 6-10 cells in the chain to 15-30 cells. and the size of rod-shaped bacteria increased from 220x0.9 to 4-80x0.8 μm.
 Fig. 1. Influence of Celtan and Acres on lactic acid bacteria 'ability to produce acid in yogurt Relatively low concentrations of Celt and Acres, 0.01-0.2%, also had a depressing effect on the development of CBDs.
  L. bulgaricus subsp. mazuni N2 "Karine" strain caused 400 0 T of acid in celtic and acreski milk, while at 0.01% concentration - 175-215 0 T, and in case of 0.2% - 64-74 0 T (see Fig. 1).
  Rod-shaped CBs withstood up to 2.0% of semazin concentrations, producing high acidity compared to acresc, celtic and crotillin at 175-185%, and at concentrations of 0.5-1.0%, the acidity was also high at 308-350, respectively. 19, 250-285 19 (Fig. 2).
  Different concentrations of hexachlor have different effects on the development of rod-shaped and spherical CBs.
  Strains of rod-shaped CBs are more resistant than spheres.
  Thus, 317/402 "Narine" strains of L. acidophilus, "Karine" strains of L. mazuni withstood 1.0% hexachlor concentration, and S. thermophilus strains M7 - up to 0.4% ( see salt 1).
 b) The effect of organic phosphorus pesticides.
  We have studied the influence of Rogor, Carbafos, Zion 161 Drin and Antioch on the development of CBDs.
  As a result of the effect of iodine (Fig. 3) and antioxidants, the ability to produce acid in CBDs decreases.
  Thus, L. mazuni K-2 "Karine" strain in acid-free milk produced up to 400 0 T, in 0.01-1.0% of ciodrine - 250-265 0 T.
  Experiments have shown that the relatively low concentrations of Rogor and Carbafos, 0.01-0.1%, also had a depressing effect on the development of CBDs.
  317/402 "Narine" strain of L. acidophilus without Rogor and carbaphos milk produced 450 0 T acid, while the concentration of 0.01% of these substances - 220-250 0 T, 0.1% - 180-195 0T (results are not displayed).
  The duration of milk coagulation has increased from 6-7 hours to 120-200 hours.
  The tested materials also have a certain effect on the cell size of CBTs (results are not shown).
  Thus, at 0.01-0.1% concentrations of Rogor and Carbafos, the cell size of rod-shaped CBTs increased from 2-4x0.9 μm to 4-50x0.9 μm.
  Spherical and rod-shaped types of KTBs have different resistance to Rogor and Carbafos.
  The rod-shaped strains of CBs withstood up to 1.0% of Rogor and Carbafos, and the streptococci with 0.1-0.2% concentration.
 Fig. The effect of semazin on the ability of lactic acid bacteria to produce acid in yogurt 162 The effect of sorbic acid and antibiotics.
  It was found that streptococci are completely suppressed at 0.7% of sorbic acid, and rod-shaped at 1.0-1.5% (see Table 1).
  High concentrations of sorbic acid - 1.0-1.5% also affect the organoleptic properties of yogurt.
  The duration of milk coagulation increases from 7-9 hours to 20-24 hours, the activity of lactic acid synthesis decreases, spherical - synthesizes from 120 0 T acid to 50-65 0 T, and rod-shaped - from 140 0 to 75 0 T ( results are not displayed).
  Similar data were obtained as a result of the effect of antibiotics. Streptococci are resistant to antibiotics up to 0.001%, and rodents to 0.0025-0.003% (see Table 1).
 Fig. 3. Effect of iodine on the ability of lactic acid bacteria to produce acid in yogurt. Effect of Nitrates.
  Nitrates affect a number of biological properties of CBDs. The higher their milk content, the deeper the changes in the properties of CBDs.
  Under their influence, the duration of milk coagulation increases, the acid production decreases, and so on.
  The sensitivity of CBDs to nitrates is different.
  Cocci are suppressed in the case of 0.7% of nitrates, rods in the case of 1.0-1.5% (see Table 1).
 163 In the case of high concentrations of sorbic acid, antibiotics, nitrates, CBDs do not show adhesive properties.
 We have developed and proposed the use of specific acidophilic bacteria to neutralize the carcinogenic effects of nitrates on the development of CBDs and the use of certain milk processing technologies [30].
 .
