The protection of the interests of the family, mother and child is one of the constitutional principles [1, p. 33].
  Article 16 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia stipulates that the family, as a natural and basic cell of society, is the basis for the preservation and reproduction of the population, as well as motherhood and childhood under the special protection and patronage of the state [2].
  This means that the state must take various socio-economic measures to promote motherhood, protect the interests of mothers and children, strengthen the family and ensure the protection of family rights.
  These measures should be implemented through a combination and application of national and international legal norms, as well as through appropriate programs developed by the state to achieve the desired result.
 131 JURISDICTION The concept of "motherhood" has a very wide range of interpretations.
  First of all, motherhood is the main biological function of a woman, which is aimed at the continuation of the human race. carrying, giving birth and feeding a child [3, p. 58].
  In the social sense, motherhood is the kinship of mothers and children, as well as their emotional connection and relationships [4, p. 540].
 As we know, every person under the age of 18 is considered a child, therefore, the concepts of childhood and child are directly interrelated concepts.
  Maternity and childhood rights in the Republic of Armenia are defined by the Constitution, family, labor, criminal legislation, through a number of legal norms related to various branches of rights.
  In this case, we are talking about the provisions of relevant domestic legal acts as well as international treaties, the universally recognized principles and norms of which are also an integral part of the domestic legal system.
 The RA Law on the Rights of the Child (1996) is of strategic importance for the formation of the ideology and practice of child protection.
  In order to provide additional guarantees for the protection of childhood and motherhood, the RA Law on Human Reproductive Health and Reproductive Rights (2002) was adopted, which establishes broad rights to ensure safe motherhood for pregnant women.
  In order to ensure the implementation of these tasks, the Supreme Council of the Republic of Armenia in 1991 adopted a decision on priority measures for women, motherhood, child protection and family strengthening, which provides additional guarantees of labor rights for women with young children.
 Since the beginning of the 20th century, more than thirty international legal acts on the protection of motherhood and childhood have been developed and adopted (conventions, recommendations of international law, bilateral interstate agreements).
  Examples include the Convention on the Rights of the Child (1869), the African Convention on the Rights of the Child and Social Protection (1990), and the European Convention on the Exercise of the Rights of the Child (1996) [5, p. 352].
  An interesting fact is that at the end of the 19th and 20th centuries, a number of European countries already had state programs for the protection of mothers and children, such as maternity insurance, which aimed to ensure the living conditions of pregnant women and newborns.
 1952 The Convention on the Protection of Motherhood has been adopted by the International Labor Organization.
  The 88th session of the General Conference of the Organization, developing the provisions of the Convention, adopted recommendations that declare the protection of pregnancy a joint responsibility of the state and society.
  The Convention obliges states to take all measures to prevent pregnant and lactating women from engaging in work that could harm the health of both mother and child.
 As children are the most vulnerable group of the population, additional independent mechanisms are needed to ensure their rights.
  In this case, there is a need to introduce a special state institution for the protection of children's rights.
  To substantiate what has been said, let us cite the following example. The Russian Federation has supported the proposal of a number of deputies of the State Duma of the Federal Assembly and human rights NGOs to establish the institution of the Commissioner for the Rights of the Child in Russia.
  As the international experience and practice of several components of the Federation show, the Commissioner for the Rights of the Child plays an important and promising role in the protection of the rights of minors.
 In this case, the scope of activities of the Commissioner for the Rights of the Child should include the cooperation of state and local self-government bodies, as well as other bodies aimed at protecting the personal rights of the child, restoring the violated right and responsibility for their violation, including employment, medical care, education. solving homelessness, disability and a number of other problems.
 Based on the recommendations made, it is envisaged that the activities of the commissioner should be clearly regulated by a specific law, which will clearly define his / her powers in the comprehensive protection of the rights of mothers, children and family.
  That is, it is necessary to develop a concept of protection of motherhood, childhood and family, on the basis of which a comprehensive regulatory act should be adopted - the Federal Law on Maternity, Childhood and Family Protection, which explains the specifics of protection of motherhood, childhood and family rights, fixing the mechanism. .
 We believe that the introduction of the above-mentioned institute in the Republic of Armenia will also ensure the existence of an effective, complete and progressive system for the protection of maternity and childhood rights, freedoms and legal interests.
  The effectiveness of the protection of maternity and childhood rights depends on such factors as the social, economic, legal guarantees and their level of development.
  The results of the study and analysis of statistical data on the above guarantees prove the progress of European countries in the field in question, from which we can distinguish Austria, Hungary, Germany, Latvia, Norway and Sweden.
  Andorra, Greece, Spain, Malta, Monaco, San Marino and the Netherlands stand out with the lowest number of indicators.
  Paid long-term maternity leave is available only in Austria, Belarus, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, the Czech Republic and Sweden.
  However, it should be noted that in states where high child care benefits are provided, vacations are shorter.
 Although the protection of motherhood and childhood in Armenia is carried out in accordance with international standards, but in terms of social protection it is definitely far behind European countries.
  In addition to social guarantees, legal and moral guarantees are also important.
 In particular, the Minsk City Executive Committee of the Republic of Belarus published on its official website a material prepared by the Academy of Management under the President of the Republic of Belarus on the basis of information received from the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection.
  In particular, it states that according to the basic law of the country (Article 32 of the Constitution of the Republic of Belarus), marriage, family, motherhood, paternity and childhood are protected by the state.
  The article presents statistics on the protection of maternity and childhood rights with medical care.
  For example, in recent years there has been a stabilization of the number of births without complications.
 In 2018, the share of normal births was more than 42% (in 2017, more than 41%).
  According to the CIA World Factbook, as of January 1, 2018, Belarus has one of the lowest maternal mortality rates in the world, along with Poland, Iceland, Greece, Finland, Sweden, Austria, the Czech Republic, Kuwait and Italy.
  According to the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Belarus also ranks 8th in the list of countries with the lowest infant mortality rates.
 Comparing with the data published by armstat.am, in 2016 In January-December, 135 JURISDICTIONS of 411 deaths of children aged 0-4 were registered in the republic, in the structure of which the mortality of children under 1 year of age was 86.6%.
  Complications related to pregnancy, during birth and postpartum, 2016 In January-December 2016, 12 cases of maternal mortality were registered, including one with missed period, and the maternal mortality rate in 2016. In January-December, the number of live births per 100,000 was 27.1 points.
  It is obvious that such an increase in indicators indicates a problem in the sector, therefore, the application of constitutional guarantees to protect maternity and childhood rights needs serious legislative oversight [8].
 For a comprehensive study of the topic, we consider it necessary to refer to the data published by Eurostat, which refer to the level of employment of mothers in European countries.
  The employment rate of mothers is the lowest in the Czech Republic at 61.5%, the highest in Iceland at 84.8%, and France at an average of 72.8%.
  Half-time is a common strategy in many countries to balance work and family relationships, which, unfortunately, is a rare phenomenon in our country, especially in the regions.
 Temporary employment levels differ significantly in the three countries. 24.1% in Iceland, 13.3% in France and only 3.9% in the Czech Republic, which suggests that the part-time form is quite unusual for the Czech Republic.
 In other words, most working women in the Czech Republic continue to work full time, even if they have children.
  And their number is constantly growing: in 2007, 24% of mothers with children under the age of 4 worked part-time.
  In all three countries, women outnumber men on a part-time basis, with France having the highest level of all three (79.8), followed by Iceland (72.6) and the Czech Republic (68.7).
 It is interesting to note that in the Czech Republic child custodians are clearly marked as recipients of maternity benefits.
  Men can be included in this category [10, page 29].
 136 JURISDICTION An interesting law on the protection of the rights of the child is enshrined in Article 72 of the Polish Constitution, which states that every citizen of the Republic of Poland has the right to demand protection of a child from violence, cruelty and exploitation by state authorities.
 Thus, the legislative field for the protection of the constitutional guarantees of motherhood and childhood has been formed in the Republic of Armenia, however, at present the situation in the field of protection of children and motherhood is not at a proper level, therefore, the need to strengthen the legislative regulation in this field is quite obvious.
  In practice, the state should continue to create new legal mechanisms and programs that will more fully promote the effective protection of maternity and childhood rights.
  In order to ensure favorable conditions in this field, it is necessary to analyze the problems of protection of the interests of mother and child in the modern society, to offer effective proposals and solutions to overcome them.
  At the same time, for the implementation of these measures, it is important not only to follow the experience of European or foreign countries, but also the further elaboration and improvement of domestic legislation in accordance with the country's internal resources.
 We also noticed that, from the point of view of medical care, the Institute of Maternity and Childhood Protection has a problem in our country, as the mortality rates among mothers and newborns are increasing.
  It is also important to pay attention to the work involvement of mothers.
 All this constitutes the totality of the constitutional guarantees of the state, including the system of economic, political, social, moral and psychological relations that characterize the state and the society, expressing the essence and the main features of the society.
 .
