The trends of integration and globalization in the modern world inevitably lead to an increase in the flow of people between countries, which improves the preconditions for the development of the hospitality sector.
  This in turn means that along with all other facilities in the hospitality sector, the hotel business is also developing.
  According to the World Tourism Organization, there are currently more than 16 million hotels in the world, about 20% of which are hotel chains1.
  As for Armenia, according to the latest data of the RA National Statistical Service, there were 556 hotel facilities in 2017, which is about 36% more than in 2014.
 During the last 4 years, the number of hotel facilities in the territory of the Republic of Armenia has increased by about 12% per year on average.
  Nevertheless, the number of hotels belonging to international chains in Armenia does not exceed a dozen.
 178 Figure 1. Number of hotels in Armenia 2 Along with the number of hotels, their turnover naturally increases.
  To illustrate the dynamics of this indicator in recent years, we will present it in the graph below.
 Figure 2. Hotel turnover from accommodation revenues (AMD 1,000) 3 As can be seen from the graph, in the post-crisis years, revenues from accommodation in Armenia show only an upward trend in 179 hotel rooms.
  In particular, in 2018, the turnover amounted to about 34.5 billion drams, which is almost 3 times more than 7 years ago.
  It can also be noticed that in the last 2 years the growth rate has increased even more, exceeding 20% ​​per year.
 Convinced of the economic activity in the hospitality sector, and in particular in the hotel market, we can say that improving the regulation of the sector is a pressing issue, as the developing industry needs stable and experienced pillars.
  In addition, such an increase in turnover will definitely attract the attention of stakeholders to make new investments.
  Accordingly, there will be a need to increase state involvement in a number of issues in the sector, including opportunities for special financial control and tax policy.
  For this reason, it can be estimated that the proposal to introduce a reliable financial system that takes into account all the details of the sector may sound interesting in the period of rapid development of the hotel market.
 Thus, the Armenian market of the hotel sector demands both quantitative and qualitative growth by the imperative of time.
 The latter can be registered as a result of applying the best international experience.
  It is not only about opening hotels of international network, but also about introducing effective international standards in existing hotels.
 Moreover, the mentioned standards refer to both the operational and financial management of the hotel facility.
  In a hotel like any other business, efficiency and development are largely due to efficient financial management.
  Therefore, the progress of the sector also implies the creation and improvement of the financial management and control system in the sector.
  In this context, let's try to study the international experience of financial management and control in hotels and consider the possibilities of using them in hotels operating in Armenia.
 The implementation of financial management and control in the hotel sector is mainly oriented towards European and American standards.
  However, the most effective flag bearer for this field is the most effective financial management and control experience used in 180 American hotel establishments.
 After the outbreak of the US economy in the 1920s after World War I, the hospitality industry flourished, prompting financial and accounting professionals to establish a set of universal accounting guidelines known as Hotel Accounting. Uniform System The Uniform System for the hotel industry was created and first used in 1926 in the United States.
  After the publication of the first edition of the system, the manual of the manual was formed, through the mediation of which the original works continued.
  The now accountable Hospitality Financial and Technology Professionals (HFTP) was founded by the Hotel Accountants Association of New York City, which regulated the associations' involvement in modifying previous editions of the unified system.
  In 1961, the American Hotel & Lodging Association (AH&LA), at the request of its members, appointed the National Association of Accountants to establish and develop a unified system of small hotel and motel accounts.
  However, in 1996 it was decided to reunite the two directions of the unified system under the name of a unified system of accounts for the hotel sector4.
  At that time, the Financial Management Board of the American Hotel and Hospitality Association, together with the New York Hotel Accountants Association and the Hospitality Finance and Technology Association, began work on a new edition of the handbook.
 This system is currently being developed and refined by the Hospitality Finance and Technology Association (HFTP) and the American Institute of Hotels and Hospitality Educational Institute (EI of AH&LA).
  The unified system of accounts for the hotel industry, having existed for more than 90 years, has been tried and 181 is also justified by time.
  The fact that the system had eleven consecutive editorial boards, including many highly qualified professionals, management companies, owners and accountants, makes it undeniable that the system was thoroughly designed and built to perfectly serve the hotel business.
 The main principle of the unified system of accounts for the hotel sector is that the results are expressed in sections based on the centers of responsibility.
  The latter can be presented both as income and as cost centers.
  That is, according to this system, the whole hotel is divided into sections, each of which is responsible for the income and expenses of its unit.
  Some hotels may not have separate structural units corresponding to certain liability centers, but regardless of this, the liability centers are segregated according to the system.
 The creation and involvement of this unified system for the hotel industry was vital for many reasons.
  First of all, being a common common guide for all representatives of the industry, it provides the possibility of comparability, comparisons and parallels between different companies.
  Due to the complete representation of the system, it becomes possible to use it as a whole by all objects in the field of hospitality.
  Proper involvement of a unified system by users is a lever to compare the financial results of one facility with another.
 Along with comparability, transparency also comes to the fore.
  Thanks to a single guideline, many errors and undesirable reporting methods are eliminated, which ensures the transparency of accounting for all parties.
  Including the integrity of the system also ensures full access to reporting to potential investors and customers.
 The unified system of accounts for the hotel sector is based on three of the main forms of financial reporting. 182 • balance sheet, • income and expense statement, • cash flow statement.
 The unified system is a guide not only for financial and accounting professionals, but also for managers, owners, entrepreneurs and all internal and external users of accounting information.
  The system is an effective tool for financial and accounting professionals to present the hotel's financial operations in a common way.
  If the hotel owner has several hotels with different financial professionals in different parts of the world, the lack of a single system will lead to distortions and unreliability of hotel profitability information.
 A number of independent experts, including O'Connor Davis Senior Consultant Ronald Martinez, have also expressed their views on the unified hotel billing system.
  According to him, the unified system ensures the presentation of the reporting components in one common way and principles, which is a guarantee of accurate information when comparing different economic units5.
 Raymond Schmidgal, a professor at Michigan State University and the Hilton Hotel, says in his work6 that this unified system of accounts is a time-tested, ready-to-use utility that is easily incorporated into operations of various scales.
  It includes the integral components of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP): stability, impartiality, reliability, accuracy, and reflects sound accounting.
 As a result of all this, the main question of this article is raised for us.
  What is the use of USALI in hotels operating in the territory of the Republic of Armenia?
  Does our local hospitality sector need to introduce a unified system of accounts and if so, what further steps should we take to implement it?
 183 First of all, it should be noted that despite the fact that USALI has become widespread throughout the world due to its breadth of application, there is still no clear unified system of financial management of hotels in Armenia.
  At present, each hotel, depending on whether it is Armenian or belongs to an international network, has its own financial management system.
 However, as we showed earlier, in this field, which registers stable and dynamic rates of development, there is undoubtedly a need to introduce a uniform financial accounting system.
  The latter is especially important at this stage, as the introduction of an effective financial control system in the early stages of development will ensure its further stability and the reliability of the received statistical and financial reports.
  On the other hand, the introduction of a unified system in Armenia will allow comparing the financial data of all industry representatives, having homogeneous and accurate statistics, comparing individual hotels with each other, and the results of the same hotel at different times, evaluating the results of different responsibility centers.
 Making clear the advantages of having a common financial system in the sector, it can also be argued that the introduction of a unified system of accounts for the hotel sector in Armenia will be more effective than developing and improving our local programs and systems.
  The fact that USALI has been used in many countries around the world for almost a century now gives us confidence that instead of reinventing a bicycle, we should just use the given opportunity.
  Therefore, we believe that any state representation interested in this issue in the sector should first of all undertake the implementation of a unified system of accounts for the hotel sector.
 Along with all the above-mentioned positive factors related to the introduction of a new system of accounts, one should also remember the legislative field.
  Here, the idea first of all conflicts with the RA Law on Accounting, according to which the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) operate in the territory of the RA.
  This means that there may be some inconsistencies between the legislation of the Republic of Armenia and the unified system of accounts for the hotel sector, as the latter is derived from the General Accounting Principles (GAAP) rather than the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS).
  It seems that this circumstance can be a serious threat to the possibility of investing USALI in Armenia, but the solution to this issue can also be found following the international experience.
 As mentioned earlier, the standard of financial management in the hospitality sector is the American model.
  It is about a unified system of accounts in accordance with the principles of universal accounting.
 It is no coincidence that today even the largest European hotel chains, such as AccorHotels and the InterContinental Hotels Group, seek to publish their financial statements in accordance with a unified system of accounts for the hotel industry.
  In addition, there is both full application when the financial statements are presented in accordance with USALI and partial application when the financial statements under IFRS are accompanied by their agreement to the unified system of accounts.
  While certain legislative changes may be necessary for the full application of USALI in Armenia, nothing prevents the partial application today.
  It should also be reminded that regardless of the requirements of the legislative field regarding financial accounting, economic entities are free to maintain their managerial accounting.
  Therefore, at least the latter can be implemented according to the unified system of accounts for the hotel sector.
  Such accounting, in turn, can highlight the inconsistencies between the system and the legislation and pave the way for a possible transition to financial accounting.
 Summing up, we can emphasize once again the fact that one of the pillars of tourism, which is considered a priority branch of the Armenian economy, the hospitality sector, needs to be improved in terms of financial management and control.
  Accordingly, the introduction and application of a unified system of accounts for the hotel sector will not only help 185 in the financial management and comparability of hotels, but will also allow the state to have uniform and accurate national statistics in this area, which is experiencing dynamic development.
 .
