Often a healthy adult's mental development depends on phenomena such as childhood deprivation.
  That is why psychological deprivation occupies a big place in childhood psychopathology and school education.
  Deprivation is a mental condition that occurs in conditions of life when a person has not been able to satisfy some of his basic mental needs to a sufficient extent for a certain period of time.
  According to the experts, the child should be brought up at an early age in a warm atmosphere of love and care.
  Events in which the child suffers from a lack of that emotional connection lead to a number of mental health disorders [2, pp. 67-78].
 The phenomenon of deprivation is especially acute in children who are involved in various social assistance organizations.
  Many researchers, since the classical period, have assumed that there is only one picture of the consequences of deprivation.
  They talked about hospitalization, analytical depression, psychopathy, or simply "deprivation syndrome" [1, 25 pages].
  However, as a result of numerous studies, these assumptions were not confirmed.
  From an early age, children living in the same institutions have different personal development, even in the development of certain mental processes.
  The difference is more pronounced in children who have been deprivated at different ages, for different reasons, as a result of different types of deprivation.
  The consequences of deprivation can be manifested by small oddities that do not go beyond the normal emotional image, to the detriment of very deep thinking and character development.
 They can be nervous, mental and even somatic disorders.
  We conducted research to find out what effects and effects deprivation has on a person both in childhood and in adulthood.
 Experience in the study of the effects of deprivation With the development of psychological diagnostic methodology, it is now easier to conduct an in-depth study of a child while examining parents or other caregivers through a grading scale, project tests and questionnaires or examining the family environment.
  267 PSYCHOLOGY can be used to determine the child's attitude towards parents and vice versa.
 An attempt was made to empirically examine children with deprivation problems.
  The research was conducted at the FAR "Child Support Center Foundation" with 20 children.
  The method of psychological conversation, observation, tests ("non-existent animal" test) and drawing method were used.
  In parallel, the same methods were used to study the same number of children in order to obtain data from the control group.
 The work of the paintings revealed interesting data related to the mental state of the children, in particular, the longing for love, warmth, parental care in the children's lives.
 During the psychological conversations we noticed a very interesting phenomenon.
  The children in the institution had speech development delays.
  Depending on the level of consequences of deprivation, children notice differences in their desire to start and maintain a conversation.
 Socially hyperactive children shout, speak very fast and loud, that is, try to attract attention in every possible way.
  Children who have more material interests are less talkative.
 In addition to delaying speech development, a depressed child also has a delay in social and hygienic skills.
  These are, for example, monitoring the cleanliness of the body, the expression of one's own desires, for the development of which the child needs constant contact with an adult.
 It is very important to organize the work with the depressed child competently and to choose the right way of therapy in order to avoid the consequences of deprivation in the future.
  It is necessary to take into account that the deeper we know the child, the deeper the correctional work will have, as well as the fact that the more we undertake it, the more hope there is for success.
  The effect of deprivation can be divided into 4 levels. deactivation, a 268 PSYCHOLOGY pedagogical education, dual methods, de-socialization.
 1. If early deprivation has caused disturbances in the level of activation of mental processes, it is necessary to provide a sufficient number of motivations from the environment.
  From the methodological point of view, social-psychological adaptation therapy would be appropriate here.
 2. It is possible to get rid of some of the consequences of deprivation by teaching with a special corrective purpose, that is, by teaching again.
  The child receives moderate motivations confirming the desired behavior.
  In other words, we are talking about creating new, more expedient knowledge instead of old, useless, deprivated skills.
 3. Some disorders can be corrected, first of all, by providing the necessary social environment for the child's relationship.
  From the methodological point of view, psychotherapy can be used there, as it is necessary to reconstruct the child's personal qualities, providing conditions for his psychological maturity.
 4. At the highest level it is necessary to include the child in the social environment and allow him to take on certain roles there.
  In the social environment and due to the social environment, the child gets rid of the consequences of deprivation and creates new, successful relationships.
 When we study deprivated children, especially in institutions, we see that they are at different levels of deprivation, and it is necessary to use different methods when working with them.
  For example, children with very strong social interest do not behave aggressively, provocatively, or participate superficially in social events, they will not need special activation, but the factors that will make their activity meaningful.
  The problem there is not to make contact, but to deepen the relationship until the child is emotionally mature and able to engage in quiet social activities: play, study, engage in creative work.
  Psychotherapy and sociotherapy will be appropriate here.
 Our goal was also to find out if deprivation can cause certain negative changes in a person, in particular, a high level of anxiety. That's why we also conducted research among adults.
  Forty people took part in the research, twenty-four were women, sixteen were men.
  Research has shown that there is no causal link between the fact of deprivation and the level of personal anxiety.
 It may seem like a paradoxical result, but the use of the conversational method allowed us to interpret the results based on certain factors.
  As a person has to face many difficulties during his life, many psychological defense mechanisms come to his aid.
  In the case of deprivated persons, the compensatory mechanism worked so hard that it helped them to adapt to the living conditions.
 Deprivation is not a destiny and its effects do not have to be very deep in a person.
  Due to the above-mentioned, other mechanisms can be used to improve the personal mental state.
 Although depressed people had low levels of personal anxiety, they still had anxiety and even fears about certain areas of life, family life.
  Not having a complete family model, they had worries about the husband-wife, parent-child relationship.
 The classic works on deprivation come to a rather pessimistic conclusion [3, pages 25-30].
  That is, the consequences of long-term psychological deprivation at an early age 270 PSYCHOLOGY are very deep, they are permanent and almost unchanged until adulthood.
  However, further work shows that the previous considerations are not fully substantiated.
  It turns out that progress is seen already in youth and early adulthood due to the active work of mental compensatory mechanisms.
 If we generalize the opinions, we can say that severe and continuous deprivation leaves profound changes in the child's mental structure, which can be permanent.
  The younger the child and the longer the deprivation lasts, the less hope there is to correct the consequences of the deprivation.
  Ջ. Bowlby notes that even a very short experience of deprivation, which passes without obvious effects, leaves at least one hidden consequence, that is, a high "vulnerability" in case of repetition of such an attempt or other unfavorable situation.
  Since the age at which a child becomes susceptible to deprivation has not yet been determined, it is also impossible to establish the extent to which correcting or mitigating the effects of deprivation will be meaningless [1, 124 pages].
 As a result of the research work, we came to the conclusion that we should not wait until the consequences of deprivation appear, but consider the problem in a proactive way.
 It follows that all efforts should be made to anticipate deprivation as soon as possible and to take corrective action in its early stages, as it will be more effective than any corrective work done with an already deprivated person.
 .
