Throughout colonial history, the "divide and rule" policy was pursued in various ways by the former European colonial powers.
  For example, France divided Africa as "Francophone", Great Britain as "Anglophone", Portugal divided it as "Lucophone".
  Unlike Great Britain, which pursued a policy of indirect intervention, France pursued a policy of direct intervention.
  The French military played a major role in the colonization of Africa [pages 2-5-5].
  Until 1960 Independence of African Colonies France remained the most influential colony in a large part of the African continent.
 566 POLITICS In colonized Africa, France preferred a policy of centralization, and France's colonial policy had devastating consequences.
 It is noteworthy that the colonial policy of France in Africa was different from the policy of Great Britain. The British colonial policy was aimed at the economic exploitation of Africa, which France based on cultural and political assimilation.
  France's assimilation policy did not respect African culture and customs.
  It banned African languages, culture, and identity.
  Great Britain saw its colonies as foreign lands, and France as a part of it.
  Moreover, France imposed French culture in Africa [1, p.2-4].
  There was one reason. France, in contrast to Great Britain, which had its influence on the post-war world order, had the psychology of a loser [2, pp. 44-45].
 To colonize Africa, France established its own economic and political systems.
  While French colonial policy played an important role in the development of France's economic interests, the economies of African countries were in decline, as the metropolis forced its colonies to trade not with each other but only with Paris [3, p.16-17].
  The colonies were obliged to import expensive goods from France and export them to the metropolis at cheap prices.
  This system led to unfair trade relations between France and its colonies. During the colonial period, French policy was also based on racism and inequality.
 France successfully implemented the policy of "Balkanization" in Africa, creating a federal system [5, p.191].
  And the backwardness of the African states was one of the main reasons for their "Balkanization" [6,10 pages].
 567 POLITICS The collapse of the colonial system after World War II posed complex problems for the world's colonial empires.
  The use of military force was not able to completely prevent the growth of national liberation movements, and all this was compounded by the policy of the US and the USSR to "dismantle" the colonial empires [2, pp.44-46].
  As for France, the latter was trying to build a neo-colonial system in the "ruins" of Africa.
 And already with the creation of the Fifth Republic in 1958, a second opportunity was created for France to reconsider its foreign policy, especially since France had inherited the problems of the colonial system from the Fourth Republic, which needed an urgent solution.
  And already in 1958, when Charles de Gaulle came to power, on the one hand the policy of decolonization, on the other hand the international situation forced France to give independence to its colonies.
 Charles de Gaulle quickly realized that if France wanted to maintain its position in Africa, it had to immediately reconsider its policy toward the colonies.
  Charles de Gaulle was expected to clarify his colonial policy, as the pursuit of the independence of the colonies was not in France's interests.
  However, after coming to power in 1958, de Gaulle continued the policy of independence of African states, establishing local assemblies and governing councils there.
  The exception was Algeria, to which France refused to grant independence, as there were about one million Europeans living there and France had important interests, but the Algerian war led to the fall of the Fourth Republic [2, p. 44-46].
 In the conditions created for France, maintaining its influence in the former African colonies was a priority.
  He carried out all this mainly through military interventions, which had both political and economic grounds.
  Based on the Franco-African military treaties, France carried out military incursions, 568 POLITICAL STUDIES primarily intervening in revolts against governments.
 The national armies of some 5,000 African nations played an important role in the security of Francophone Africa.
  The national armies, whose weapons and ammunition were sufficient for self-defense operations, had a problem in providing personnel.
  The ranks of the army were provided by the Africans, and the main officer staff was provided by the French.
 After the independence of the African territories of France, a new political challenge was put on the agenda. that is, to find ways of cooperating with the former colonies to achieve France's far-reaching goals, which were: 1. to unite the former African colonial states in a common political field, 2. to have leverage, 3. to ensure a permanent presence, 4. to continue colonial policy; 5. to establish Franco-African relations on an institutional basis; 6. to control the economy of the former colonies; 7. to promote cultural values ​​and the French language; and to strengthen its influence in the former colonial territory through cultural and linguistic policies.
 France has developed a number of mechanisms to achieve its goals, including the French Constitution, the Franco-African Union, the International Organization of La Francophonie, the French Language and Culture, and reciprocal presidential visits [7.35 pages].
 The mechanisms under discussion clashed with the interests of African countries and the motives for cooperation with France.
 The post-colonial policy of France in general and of the Francophonie in particular was not unequivocally accepted by the former African colonies.
  For example, Guinean leader Seco Toure, who said "no" to the French community in 1958, rejected Francophonie.
  He considered it an attempt to betray African interests, an act that was to give independence with one hand and to seize it with the other [8, p.12].
  He argued that Francophonie excluded the terms of African independence, returning French-speaking African nations to the status of a French-occupied state [9, p.9].
 The leaders of Guinea and Ghana believed that Francophonie was a return to achievement rather than progress, and that it was nothing more than the restoration of colonial power.
 Most of the leaders of the former French colonies thought that the promotion of the French language and culture would benefit the African people for the Franco-African political community, and Francophonie was the most effective and efficient way to secure pan-African unity and international aid during the Cold War. [9, p.9]
  African leaders feared a Cold War "stage" and were wary of choosing France as their main ally, but France remained a more pragmatic choice because of fears of expanding US interests on the African continent and "Americanization" of Central Africa. .4].
 According to some African leaders, Africa preferred socialism to communism, which was not an obstacle to the interests of the United States and the Soviet Union, but refused to join the anti-communist movement, believing that it would only lead to dangerous results [11, p.45].
  Political scientist Senghor believed that African socialism needed to be confirmed in order to determine Africa's role in the world [11, p, 45].
 Algeria and Morocco, which became independent as a result of the struggle, believed in the unity of the Arab world rather than in the solidarity of the French-speaking states [10, p.4].
 570 POLITICS However, recognizing that Francophonie had colonial roots, it remained a major means of international cooperation for African countries.
 In the Cold War world, the French colonial principle was an undeniable fact in African history.
  Supporters of the Francophonie, accepting the influence of the French colony, tried to adapt it to their culture and politics and to serve the common heritage for the benefit of Africa.
  "They accepted French as the language of freedom, not as French sovereignty" [13, pp.160-161].
  The Tunisian leader Habib Bourguiba stated in one of his speeches in 1968, "It was in French that we represented our national interest, it was French that helped us communicate, disseminate and make us listen and understand" [13, p.160-].
  French was the most familiar and accessible means of communication with the world [14, p.198].
  The President of Tunisia considered the French language to be a very valuable diplomatic tool, which is really necessary for the post-colonial African countries to establish statehood and establish foreign relations [13, p.162].
 Convinced that the use of French in the new conditions lacked a colonial tone, the African French-speaking countries focused on promoting the organization.
 Their aim was to emphasize the practical values ​​of the Francophonie - the cultural, economic, political priorities that the organization offered to African countries.
  Thus, Francophone African leaders were not given the opportunity to rebuild their existing structures for post-colonial needs.
  Moreover, given that most of the African leaders of the Francophonie had begun their careers, either as French civil servants or as teachers in French colonial schools, it was more likely that the French system of government would prevail. They knew.
 Despite all this, African leaders in their conclusions and speeches often presented the need for the development of African languages, aware of the possible ideological implications of the continued use of French in the African public sphere and in post-colonial countries.
  Indeed, as the French anthropologist Vincent Countil noted, the issue of African identity was extremely worrying.
  "When one lives in Africa, one is shocked by the importance of the fact that French-speaking Africans (students or others) have three main problems: their authentic history, their mother tongue, and their African personality (which some call negritude)" [15, p.796] .
  If language and culture were inextricably linked, as the French claimed, African leaders would have to develop indigenous languages ​​as well.
 By integrating French into their post-colonial reality, Francophone African countries will incorporate French into their political life as a language of collective identity.
 Francophonie could not be considered an organization without flaws.
  Nevertheless, it was seen as a continuation of colonial policy and the provision of a new level of cooperation.
  As leaders of the newly independent nations, the supporters of the Francophonie could do nothing but make political and cultural choices that were more expedient.
 Thus, France's goals were a direct birth of a policy of decolonization on the African continent and a solution to get out of the current situation.
  The mechanisms proposed for the implementation of the goals were not unequivocally accepted by the newly independent colonies, the latter, clearly realizing the goals of France, tried to ensure a new level of cooperation.
 .
