The state, with its regulatory role, plays a central role in ensuring economic growth and it must develop a clear policy to develop the economy in the country.
  The study of international experience is very important when developing a policy.
  For example, in the Asian Miracle countries, the three elements of the investment-export-savings interaction worked, which led to economic growth.
 In the local market, investments and exports together stimulate demand, and the growth of profit savings is a source for new investments.
  The most important component of economic development is the reproduction of capital.
  To ensure economic development, the country must ensure an annual investment level of at least 12%.
 73 ECONOMICS Foreign direct investment (FDI) is an important source of external financing.
  The impact of FDI on the economy has been discussed many times by economists.
 Some of them consider that foreign investments are one of the important stimuli for economic development, while others consider that FDI can have a negative impact on local investors and the economy in general.
  FDCs, as a rule, bring with them new technologies, new management experience, access to new markets, new social networks, which are mainly lacking in developing countries and are very important for their economic development.
  In contrast, portfolio investments often target speculative activity (mainly in the stock market or construction), which leads to financial bubbles and fluctuations.
  That is why they are not as effective for developing countries as FDI.
  Compared to banks and portfolio investments, they are less prone to immediate returns and do not generate the same acute problems associated with financial crises as banks and portfolio importers demand for a quick return on cash flows.
 The total investment in January-December 2017 amounted to 404.2 million dollars, compared to 1 billion 216.5 million dollars in 2016.
  That is, the volume of investments decreased by 812.3 million dollars or 3 times.
  Foreign direct investment decreased by $ 92.4 million to $ 245.7 million, while portfolio investment decreased by $ 113.7 million.
  In the second quarter of 2018, a total investment of $ 525.5 million was made, which is 18 million dollars or 3.5% higher than in the second quarter of 2017.
  In the first quarter, only the growth of investments was bigger - 116.4 million dollars or 22.5%.
  Receipts from direct investments, on the contrary, have decreased.
  Receipts from direct investments in the second quarter of this year amounted to $ 75.6 million, compared to $ 133.9 million in the second quarter of 2017. 74 ECONOMICS.
  The decrease is $ 58.3 million or 43.5%.
  The decrease is largely due to the de facto termination of the Amulsar project.
 Armenia may have the following problems with attracting investment: Armenia is considered a risk zone for a foreign investor due to the fact that the Lars checkpoint connecting the outside world from the northern border to the outside world is closed several times a year.
 The domestic market is quite small for consumption.
  In order to improve the internal market, it is necessary to implement a policy that promotes competition, to improve tax administration.
  EEU member Armenia may be a link between Iran and the Middle East, but there are still some logistical problems with Lars.
 One of the important directions of ensuring dynamic economic growth is ensuring dynamic export growth due to the positive balance of exports and imports.
  Export growth also boosts investment, but this connection is not always guaranteed.
  For example, Turkey and Chile in the 1980s and many other countries in the 1980s and 1990s, where exports grew in GDP but investment continued to grow slightly.
  Export growth, in addition to increasing direct economic growth, has other derivative positive effects on the economy, such as increased competitiveness of national products, technical progress, increased foreign exchange availability, increased factor efficiency, scale effect, and so on.
  The rapid economic growth of East Asian countries proves that the external direction is more effective for economic growth than the domestic one.
 Consider how the "Economic Miracle" countries achieved significant growth in exports, investment and GDP.
  These countries have undergone a massive process of re-launching exports, abandoning labor-based and resource-based, high-tech products based on experience and knowledge, which in the 1960s 75 ECONOMICS Asian tigers saw a huge increase in world trade.
  The growth mechanism of these countries is not clear, as it does not consist of only one model, but some generalization can be made.
  One of the keys to success is the creation of an environment conducive to investment through the protection of property rights, macro-stability, an open trade system, the involvement of foreign investors and foreign technologies.
  Of course, the state support program for export promotion was effective in these countries, but in each country these policies were different.
  In addition to the macroeconomic policy, which kept the economy free of imbalances, the financial assistance of export-oriented organizations was also very important, which was a great stimulus for increasing investments in those sectors and increasing export volumes.
  Such funding programs are referred to as "industrial policy" and the development of such a policy always takes into account the experience of "Asian tigers".
 Extensive industrial stimulus programs have been implemented in Korea, Taiwan, to a lesser extent in Singapore, Thailand, Indonesia and Malaysia, and in all cases the profits from industry have exceeded those of services, and in some cases agriculture.
  Following the process of economic growth of "Asian tigers", it is possible to compile a system of action list, which should be followed by developing countries in order to increase exports. - Development of physical infrastructure (roads, airports, ports, etc.) and social infrastructure (educated workforce), - Export-trade-boosting lending, reduction or elimination in general, creation of suitable conditions for the introduction of technologies that increase the productivity of the production process.
 Many developing countries, including Armenia, rely heavily on raw material exports, which make up the bulk of their exports.
  Some studies show that countries that focus on exports of finished products are growing faster than countries that export raw materials.
  No less important here is the training of the workforce, innovation, more knowledge-based and production of complex products.
  Studies show that the wider exporting countries have faster GDP growth per unit capital [10 p1-15] and greater diversification of exported goods leads to higher GDP [6].
  Countries that export products with relatively more technological components have a rate of economic growth that would not be possible otherwise.
  Concerns that [1 p119-128] economic growth in developing countries may lead to a deterioration in US trade [2] and that growing trade between the US and developing countries will exacerbate US wage inequality, both indirectly suggest, that goods produced in the United States and developing countries are interchangeable and that specialization is incomplete.
  But in reality, the world specialization has its peculiarities and developing and developed countries export completely different products.
  This is evidenced by the statistics, according to which the shares of the United States and developing countries in terms of product range do not coincide in general, and the exports of developed countries are dominated by more sophisticated and high-tech products.
  This does not apply to basic necessities, as they are almost identical in the exports of developing and developed countries 77 ECONOMICS.
  Although the economies of China and several Asian countries have made considerable progress in exporting high-tech goods, the differences in the export structure of developing and developed countries are still evident.
 Many developing countries, including Armenia, can take advantage of the "advantage" of cheap labor and attract the interest of foreign direct investors in various industries.
  However, this should not be considered as an unequivocal economic advantage.
  The O-Ring theory explains the differences between developing and developed countries in the following way: production consists of different problems and in order for the final product or service to be successfully produced or delivered, all problems must be solved successfully in sequence [11 p 551].
  In the same way, the quality of work of each employee depends on the quality of work of all other employees.
  Thus, highly qualified employees strive to work with highly qualified employees, as the overall quality of work will be higher and as a result of the exchange of experience, each of them will gain more skills and the quality of the product will improve, and vice versa will work for low-skilled employees.
 The same "O-ring" effect is also available for different organizations in the country: the increase of the quality of some of the organizations brings with it the increase of the quality of several additional organizations.
  Due to this effect, poor countries with low-skilled labor mainly specialize in agriculture and export raw materials or agricultural products, while rich countries produce and export a wide range of quality products, concentrating highly qualified workers and providing them with high-quality jobs. The international division of labor 78 ECONOMICS between different countries of the world, and in the current chain it is difficult for poor countries to get out of that chain and develop.
  Developing countries, which rely only on the opportunities of cheap labor, find themselves in a kind of "trap".
 It is here that the intervention of the state and the elaboration and implementation of the development policy are necessary.
  In this regard, it is also important to ensure a proper level of science and education, due to which the market is replenished with new specialists aware of international experience and knowledge.
  Thanks to such specialists, it is possible to bring local economic entities to a higher level.
  An educated and well-trained workforce has been one of the keys to the rapid development of Eastern countries, and education in general is an important guarantee of economic growth.
  The introduction of foreign advanced technologies in the country implies not only an increase in the level of education and science, but also a great involvement of local companies in the import, licensing and establishment of business relations with foreign technologies.
 An important guarantee for the development of the country's economy is the low level of corruption.
  However, this hypothesis can also be viewed from the opposite side: anti-corruption tools and high-quality state institutions are quite expensive and only rich countries can afford it.
  Considering the list of the most corrupt countries [18], one can already draw some conclusions and conclude that most of them are developing or transitional countries, countries that were or are now ruled by socialists, they are mainly low-income countries.
  The historical reality in Singapore and Hong Kong can be a counter-argument to this view.
  Both pursued a tougher anti-corruption policy in conjunction with reforms and improvements in the public administration sector, while at a relatively low level of development, although their economic growth was quite impressive.
  The significant level of corruption is also an important obstacle for the development of Armenia's economy.
  According to the Transparency International Anti-Corruption Center, Armenia shared 107th-110th place among 180 countries with 35 points.
  Last year, Armenia's Corruption Perceptions Index (CEC) was 33, ranking it 113-115th out of 176 countries.
  Armenia is now behind the Baltic states and Georgia, whose CEC index is equal to 56, and Belarus, whose index in 2017 improved from 40 to 44, Turkey - 40 points.
  In addition to Belarus, the CEC values ​​of the EEU member states continue to be lower than the CEC values ​​of Armenia.
  The value of the Russian CEC remained 29 points (135th to 142nd places).
  This year Kyrgyzstan equaled it, advancing by 1 point.
 Economic analyzes show a positive correlation between corruption reduction and GDP growth in Asian tiger countries.
  However, it is difficult to accurately estimate the extent of corruption in the country, as they are mainly shadow in nature, and it is also difficult to predict in advance whether and to what extent the fight against corruption and spending in this direction will lead to GDP growth.
  However, let us single out the directions through which corruption affects production volumes and economic growth. - Transmission mechanisms.
  The ability of competitive markets to distribute economic resources in the most efficient way.
  In practice, the "shortcomings" of the market lead to "unfair" incomes, which the state can mitigate by interfering in economic processes.
  The existence of public goods pushes the state to ensure their implementation, and in order for it to be able to finance these important functions, it pursues a tax policy.
  This raises the possibility of corruption, as many criminals can hide their corrupt actions and the need for state intervention arises again.
  That is why countries with a very wide public sector are among the least corrupt (for example, the Scandinavian countries) due to their high quality government regulation.
  An effective anti-corruption policy should seek to ensure transparent and accountable state institutions, rather than focusing on the degree of government involvement.
 - Private investments.
  When investing in a private business is subject to public regulation, corruption in the form of bribery will increase investment costs for the processing of relevant inquiries [13], which in turn will reduce the return on investment and, ultimately, the overall volume of investment.
  Another manifestation of corruption in this case may be investing in inefficient projects, which will also lead to inefficient use of resources and impede economic growth.
  The negative impact of corruption on investment has been studied by many theorists [12] and they all argue that there is an inverse relationship between these two indicators.
  Foreign direct investors are also not tempted by countries characterized by high levels of corruption, these countries are not a promising and reliable investment platform for them, this view is reinforced by empirical research [3].
 - Competition and entrepreneurship.
  In many cases, corruption also undermines effective competition, such as weakening government regulation in this area to maintain free competition or impeding free market access for newcomers.
  This is important because a free competitive market promotes efficiency and innovation, and without competition, organizations have no incentive to increase efficiency or innovate.
  Corruption mechanisms of competition competition can also be observed in the field of public procurement.
  The corruption-competition relationship is also strongly linked to the openness of the economy to trade and investment.
  Entrepreneurship, the mainstay of the economy 81 ECONOMICS is one of the issues, and corrupt practices that disrupt competition and entrepreneurship hinder innovation, startups, investments, increase operating costs and make entrepreneurship unattractive in the country.
 - Public administration.
  One of the latest but no less important corruption impulses is the impact on the size and structure of public expenditures and revenues.
  This refers to the corrupt transactions of taxpayers and taxpayers, due to which state funds are reduced and do not meet sustainable economic development.
  The shadow economy is the result of these corrupt deals.
  On the other hand, artificial inflations of the price or quantity of goods in public procurement are also a form of corruption.
 Some theorists also discuss the role of corruption in the policy of allocating public spending, when, for example, state funds are allocated to defense instead of being sent to scientific and educational or health funds [12] 1.
 Ensuring sustainable economic growth in developing countries is possible through the effective provision of the following chain by the state: formation of the legislative framework and ensuring-reducing the level of corruption-raising the level of scientific-educational-promotion of investments and in particular the promotion-export of foreign investments.
  Each component of this chain is linked to all the other components and only with the joint operation of all components is it possible to achieve sustainable and guaranteed economic growth.
 .
