The introduction of the concept of a secular state is certainly a necessary impetus for building a democratic society in the Republic of Armenia.
  But before becoming secular, it is necessary to notice what historical periods Armenia has entered in terms of its attitude towards religion and spiritual class.
 In this regard, it is necessary to present a step-by-step description of the relationship between secular and spiritual authorities from the beginning of Armenia's history to the Third Republic of Armenia, highlight the peculiarities of the pre-Christian and post-Christian Armenian state, reveal the state and clergy in a specific historical period. .
  In the context of the above, the following historical periods of these relations and their evolution can be conditionally separated: 1) theological period, 2) the period of separation of king and high priest positions, 3) the period of recognition of Christianity as a state religion, 4) the period of the First Republic of Armenia, 5) atheism Soviet period, 6) the modern period of a secular state.
  Moreover, these stages have their peculiarities and significance of development.
  In particular. 1. Regarding the theological period. In ancient Armenia, next to the royal government, there was another influential class, the clergy.
  The clergy class was characterized by its tangible role in various spheres of public administration and public life.
  296 JURISDICTION The royal family held the position of high priest, and the king also acted as high priest.
 In the ancient Sumerian inscriptions there are evidences about the first Armenian state formation - Aratta 1.
  Aratta, referred to in Sumerian mythology as the land of “sacred laws and immortals,” was a theocracy in which secular and spiritual authority were in the hands of the clergy, who ruled the earth in the name of God.
  King Aratta, who considered himself the king appointed by the goddess of war Inanna, was also the high priest of the country.
  Adjacent to it was the supreme advisory body, the Council of Elders, which controlled the secular and spiritual spheres.
  The theocracy as a characteristic of the form of the state was also characteristic of the other Armenian state formations after Aratta.
  The Kingdom of Van had its state religion, which as a solid system of deities and beliefs worshiped by different peoples of the empire, was one of the circumstances contributing to the unification of the population of the Armenian Highlands3.
  The ruling wealth of the Ararat kingdom (Urartu) was religiously connected with the temple of Musasir, the religious center of Khald.
  The king was the representative of the supreme god Khaldi and acted on his behalf.
 The privileged class of the clergy enjoyed the patronage of the royal government.
  The priests acted There is no common opinion in historiography about the location of TaArtta built by the Urartian kings.
  Different authors have placed it in different regions of Afghanistan, Iran and Armenia.
  In our judgments we have taken as a basis the views of historians Artak Movsisyan and Martiros Gavukchyan on the location of Arrata, state structure and other issues.
 See Artak Movsisyan. 5000-year-old Armenian statehood. Publicly accessible picture book (second revised edition) Edit Print Publishing House Yerevan 2016 page 9.
 See, S. Գ. Hmayakyan, The State Religion of the Kingdom of Van (Editor-in-Chief: BB Piatrovsky) Institute of Archeology and Ethnography - Yerevan AAS Publishing House. 1990 page 9.
 297 JURISDICTION, manages the temple property, which was mainly formed from donations made by kings.
  That is why the clergy unconditionally accepted the absolute power of the monarch and his supremacy over all spheres of state and public life.
 The legal sources of this period were expressed in the form of cuneiform records.
  They are written mainly in the spirit of the religious beliefs of the time, where the strictest legal responsibility was considered to be divine punishment.
 2. On the period of separation of the positions of king and high priest. During the time of the Armenian Yervanduni, a radical change took place in the system of public administration from the point of view of the ratio of secular and spiritual authorities.
  If before the Armenian king acted as a high priest-king, now there is a separation between the positions of king and high priest4.
  Movses Khorenatsi testifies that King Vagharshak inherited the position of high priest from one of the ancient Armenian tribes, the Vahunis, who considered themselves the descendants of the god Vahagn5.
 The kings tried to make this prestigious and influential class predictable by appointing their close relatives as high priests.
  The king's relatives were also responsible for performing priestly rites.
  Movses Khorenatsi testifies to the fact that King Yervand IV appointed his brother Yervaz as a high priest6.
  According to another testimony, Artashes A. BareTes, Artak Movsisyan. 5000-year-old Armenian statehood Science-accessible picture book (second revised edition) Edit Print Publishing House Yerevan 2016 Page 29.
 See Movses Khorenatsi Armenian History, Exam Origin and Introduction by M. Abeghyan and S. Harutyunyan, Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR Yerevan 1991 Chapter H.
 See Movses Khorenatsi Armenian History, Exam Origin and Introduction by M. Abeghyan and S. Harutyunyan, Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR Yerevan 1991 Chapter Խ.
 298 JURISDICTION The priest appoints his son Majan as the high priest of the idol of Aramazd7.
  The above-mentioned evidences are supporting the assertion that the appointment of the priesthood was directly dependent on the king's discretion and was aimed at strengthening the political position.
 The spread of Christianity in Armenia met with sharp opposition from the state.
  The state took control of the entire spiritual field, defining religion as one of the levers of power, in the struggle against dissent.
  Agatangeghos quotes in two of his two proclamations of King Trdat III, which imposed punishments on those who would adhere to another religion or adopt a religion other than paganism8.
 Naturally, in this period there could be no question of any component of a secular state.
 The right to freedom of conscience and religion and religious pluralism in general not only did not exist but also had no visible prospect of conceiving it.
  From the proclamations issued by King Trdat, as well as from the contents of the proclamation of Emperor Diocletian to Trdat, it is clear that Christianity had the status of a sect at that time and there was a strong state resistance against it.
  Later, with the recognition of Christianity, one totalitarian belief was replaced by another, and heresy was banned.
  Prominent Armenian jurist Kh. Samuelyan supposes that the political act of declaring Christianity the state religion by Trdat the Great was an intention to strengthen the weakened power by relying on the "centrist hierarchical system of the new religion", which, however, took a different course with the strengthening of the Church9.
 See, Ibid., Ch. Thirteen.
 See, Agatangeghay. History of Armenia, the original of the exam G. Ter-Mkrtchyan and S. Kanayants. Yerevan University Publishing House Yerevan 1983 page 83.
 See Kh. Samuleyan History of Ancient Armenian Law Volume 1, Armfan Publishing House Yerevan 1939 page 41.
 299 JURISDICTION 3. On the period of recognition of Christianity as a state religion. During the reign of the Armenian Arshakuni, Christianity was declared the official religion and the spread of Christianity began at the state level.
  If before the conversion to Christianity the state saw severe revenge against its followers and preachers, then after the proclamation of Christianity as the state religion, the secular and spiritual authorities, allied with each other, began a fierce struggle against the clergy and the "idol worshipers".
 The triumph of Christianity and the acquisition of the status of official religion did not change anything in the relationship between secular and spiritual authorities.
  Only the spiritual subject changed, but the logic of the relationship remained the same.
  The church class inherited spiritual authority from the priesthood.
  In general, the clergy was a spiritual monarchy within the state, with its hierarchy, internal structure, and the privileged status of tax collection and exemption.
  He was given the agency of the great trial10.
  The most important issues concerning the state were discussed in world conferences, which were attended by high-ranking ministers, military, judges and others.
  Significantly, the issue of choosing a spiritual leader was discussed at these meetings.
 Archbishop Malakia notices very accurately. Ormanyan. "... the Catholicosate in Armenia was simply and absolutely not ecclesiastical.
  All the patriarchs enjoyed a special position and special entrepreneurship in state affairs, both as the ancestor of the Pahlavuni or Partevazants house, as a blood relative of the royal dynasty and in-laws, and as a clergyman. See Hakob Manandyan. Feudalism in ancient Armenia, published by Melkonyan Foundation Yerevan, 1934. page 60.
 See History of Faustus the Byzantine Armenian, original K. Patkanyan. Yerevan University Publishing House Yerevan 1987 page 72.
 300 JURISDICTION Head of government who had supreme authority over clerical, educational, charitable and judicial matters ”12.
 From the day of its creation, the church assumed the function of administering justice, which it maintained even in the absence of statehood.
  Ecclesiastical rules, as regulating the various spheres of society, were adopted in ecclesiastical assemblies.
  Those meetings were, in fact, also national assemblies, because they touched upon and discussed issues of both religious and secular-everyday nature and were subject to mandatory implementation by the entire population of Armenia.
  Speaking about the congregations of Ashtishat, Shahapivan, Aghveni, Dvin, Partavi, Ssi (1243), Dzagavan (1268), Jerusalem (1651) and emphasizing a number of common features, such as publicity, supremacy over other decisions, ideological The clear direction, the circumstance of being accepted by national consent, Professor G. Harutyunyan comes to the conclusion that they were constituent assemblies13.
 In addition to members of the upper clergy, secular figures — members of the ministerial household, princes, and sometimes even kings.
  Pavstos Buzand describes the Ashtishat Congregation as "... ordained, compiled, regulated, copied" 14, from which it becomes clear that these congregations not only set rules of a spiritual nature, but also how the word "copied" (law) suggests. , carried out law-making activities.
  The legal regulatory role of the church was particularly manifested in the family law - marriage, See, M. Ormanian, Azgapatum, Volume A, book ABC Azgapatum The holes of the Armenian Orthodox Church from the beginning to the present day are narrated by A. Volume, part A., B. Courtesy of Mr. Tachat Srapian, Beirut, Press. Sevan, 1959 page 93.
 See, Harutyunyan GG Constitutional culture. History lessons and challenges of the time (ed. G. Danielyan, R. Avagyan, K. Mirumyan), reprint: (with revisions) Yerevan, Njar 2016 page 85.
 See History of Faustus the Byzantine Armenian, original K. Patkanyan. Yerevan University Publishing House Yerevan 1987 page 118.
 301 JURISDICTION In defining the degree of adoption, kinship, parent-child relationship15.
 Initially, the ordination of the Armenian Catholicos was directly conditioned by the consent of the Greek Metropolitan and the Church Synod of Caesarea.
  But the Armenian Pope started the nationalization of the church, ordaining Shahak I Manazkerttsi as the Armenian Catholicos without the permission of Caesarea.
 Pavstos's testimony shows that during the Pope, perhaps for the first time in the Christian history of Armenia, the right to freedom of conscience and religion, to adhere to the preferred religion, was introduced.
  As a result, some people returned to the old faith, each "doing whatever they wanted, they did it with courage" 16.
  At the same time, the pope abolished the fruit and tithes taxes, confiscated five of the seven church lands in favor of the court, leaving only two for one priest and one deacon, and sent their relatives to serve in the court.
  The rapprochement with Persia, which professed the Mazdez religion, must have exacerbated relations between the king and the church on the one hand, and the king and the Byzantine elite on the other, resulting in the assassination of the pope.
  One fact is that the Pope's model of building a new society based on the right to freedom of conscience and religion, where everyone professed what they wanted, was a bold vision of a secular state.
  No matter how much the chroniclers name the Pope, in any case we think that the reforms he undertook in the field of secular and spiritual authorities were quite progressive and ambitious for those times.
  Freedom of conscience and religion, which in the early Middle Ages, of course, did not yet have its legal formulation, was in fact practiced, ensuring universal religious pluralism.
 See Kh. Samuleyan History of Ancient Armenian Law Volume 1, Armfan Publishing House Yerevan 1939 page 43.
 See History of Faustus the Byzantine Armenian, original K. Patkanyan. Yerevan University Publishing House Yerevan 1987 page 352.
 302 JURISDICTION The status of the state religion of Christianity was also preserved in Bagratuni and Cilician Armenia.
  Without strong secular power, the church could not maintain its economic stability while at the same time reliably securing the leadership of the Christian flock.
  The church acted as the spiritual patron of the royal government.
  The multiplicity of religious classes, the development of church infrastructure was directly proportional to the suppression of the directions that rejected the Enlightenment-monotheistic religion, to the conversion of their members.
  In foreign affairs the church tried to keep its own religious line intact, not to submit to the pressures of the Byzantine patriarchs and emperors.
  It should be noted that the demand of Byzantium to impose the religion of its own church on the Armenians was not only a narrow religious issue.
  Theological issues, in their turn, pursued far-reaching political goals. that is, to deprive Armenia of its spiritual independence and create fertile ground for its complete achievement.
  That was the reason that still in 451. The religious controversy over the "two natures of Christ" in the Council of Chalcedon also marked a turning point in interstate relations.
 Speaking about the legal system of the Bagratunyats Kingdom, Professor Kh. Samuelyan notes that there are provisions in Mkhitar Gosh's "Judgment Book" that bear the influence of the legal system of the Bagratunyats region17.
  Separate royal decrees were recorded in figurative inscriptions.
  In addition, a number of foreign laws and collections have been applied in the state18.
 In Cilician Armenia, in addition to customary and canon law, the sources of law are the rules of David Alavkaordi, the court books of Mkhitar Gosh and Smbat Sparapet, as well as the codes borrowed from foreign countries.
 See Kh. Samuleyan. History of Ancient Armenian Law Volume 1, Armfan Publishing House Yerevan 1939 page 138.
 See Torosyan H. Court and proceedings in Armenia X-XIII c. E., 1985, p. 44.
 303 JURISDICTION A unique source of canon law can be considered Nerses Shnorhali's "The General Paper", which is a work written in the spirit of regulation, with the meaning of regulating the relations between different classes of society.
 In Cilician Armenia, executive power was exercised through royal agencies, which were appointed not on the basis of heredity, but on the basis of individual skills and conformity to the position19.
  The king's secretary, also known as the clerk or chancellor, was usually the archbishop of Sis, although it was also the case that another high-ranking clergyman was appointed clerk.
  Chancellor was also an influential player in the foreign relations of the state, as he participated in state diplomatic work, conducted negotiations.
 4. On the region of the first republic of Armenia. A qualitatively new situation was created between the state and the relationship between religion and law, when the Armenian statehood was re-established after the absence of a six-century-old state.
  During the difficult years of the existence of the First Republic, the Armenian Apostolic Holy Church embarked on the traditional mission of establishing a state.
  The church, which during the years of anarchy had always borne the heavy yoke of persecution, was given a wide opportunity to act independently under the auspices of the First Armenian Republic.
  It should be noted that a large number of the leading figures of the first republic were the graduates and teachers of the Gevorgyan Theological Seminary20.
  An interim treaty was adopted to regulate the legal relations between the state and the church, the content of which was based on the friendly relations between the church and the state.
  The first point of the pact defined: "Hay Arates, S.V. Bornazyan, Socio-Economic Relations in the Armenian State of Cilicia in the 12-14th Centuries Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian SSR Yerevan 1973 page 68.
 Simon Vratsyan, Nikol Aghbalyan, Avetis Aharonyan and others.
 304 JURISDICTION The Celtic Mother Church blesses the legitimate patriarchal authority of the Republic of Armenia, and the Republic of Armenia guarantees the supreme and sovereign rights of the Mother See and His Holiness the Catholicos of All Armenians in national-ecclesiastical and religious issues ”21.
  The second point of the pact stipulated: "The Armenian Apostolic Holy Church declares itself independent of sovereignty, by which it ratifies the management of its economic activity" 22.
  In addition, the Covenant gave the church ample freedom to carry out its educational function.
  The church could open schools and religious institutions, have a plenipotentiary representative under the government, and publish official church publications regardless of state intervention.
 5. On the Soviet period of atheism. During the seven decades of the existence of the Soviet Union, the Armenian Apostolic Holy Church suffered all the consequences of the totalitarian control of the state, being deprived of the right to freely satisfy the religious needs of its members.
 Although the Constitution of the Soviet Union guaranteed the right to believe in any religion or not, the state policy pursued atheistic propaganda in this area, violating the constitutionally enshrined right to freedom of conscience.
  The construction of a socialist system and the distant vision of the abolition of classes must have broken the various customs and norms rooted in "tsarism", one of which was religious.
 See Sandro Behbudyan, Documents on the History of the Armenian Church, Book E, Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin during the First Republic ACT, December 2. 1920, Yerevan 1999 pp. 516-517.
 See Sandro Behbudyan, Documents on the History of the Armenian Church, Book E, Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin during the First Republic ACT, December 2. 1920, Yerevan 1999 pp. 516-517.
 Tsarist Russia took religion under its protection.
  The law did not even define formal freedom of conscience, it was forbidden atheism 305 JURISDICTION The abolition of the first republic of Armenia, as a result of which its sovietization, was the beginning of a new historical period.
  On December 17, 1920, by the decision of the Revolutionary Committee of Armenia, the school was separated from the church, and on December 19, the buildings of the Echmiadzin monastery and a part of the property were confiscated, including the building of the Djemaran24.
  Later, hundreds of churches were demolished, of which only 4 remained, and 800 were closed administratively.
  Several organizations were set up to destroy the church25.
 The most important document defining the content, forms and methods of propagating atheism during the period of socialist construction was the famous Bolshevik VI. Lenin's article "On the Significance of Combatant Materialism" (1922), which stated that it was necessary to give the masses the most diverse materials on atheistic propaganda, to awaken them from their religious slumber, to shake them from the various sides, in various ways, and so on.
 and the blasphemy was prosecuted.
  Religious organizations were divided into four groups.
  The first group represented the ruling Russian Orthodox Church.
  It was governed by a state body, the Holy Synod, and was funded by the royal treasury.
  The second group consisted of religious organizations that advocated autocracy, but they were inferior to the Russian Orthodox Church in terms of state care.
  Among them were the Catholic, Lutheran, Reformed, Armenian-Gregorian churches, etc.
  The third group included religious organizations that were allowed to exist but did not enjoy any state support, such as Baptists and Mennonites.
  Finally, a number of religious denominations that were openly opposed to the Orthodox Church were persecuted by the dictatorship (Dukhobors, Molokans, Anteritians, etc.).
 See, Arusyak Terchanyan. The Armenian Apostolic Church during the Second World War, New Life Institute Publishing House Yerevan 2001 page 19.
 See, V, Yengibaryan, A. Chakhoyan, Fundamentals of Spiritual Law. Union of Judges of the Republic of Armenia, ed. Arthur Sarkavag Sargsyan. Yerevan Antares 2011 pp. 45-46.
 See Scientific Atheism, Second Edition, Hayastan Publishing House, Yerevan, 1980, p. 220.
 306 JURISDICTION 1922 The first constitution of the USSR, adopted in 1945, proclaimed the separation of church and state from the church.
  Article 52 of the Constitution confirmed: "Citizens of the USSR are guaranteed freedom of conscience, that is, the right to believe in any religion or not, to perform religious rites or to promote atheistic propaganda.
  It is forbidden to incite enmity and hatred and hatred in connection with religious beliefs. ”27
  In the Soviet Union, citizens could teach religion and study religion privately.
  Parents were not forbidden to teach their children religion at home, but such teaching should not be in the nature of a group school.
  In the USSR, being separated from the church meant that any influence of religious organizations on public education and upbringing was inadmissible28.
  Soviet law forbade religious associations and worshipers from using religious gatherings and other gatherings for political speeches against state interests, forcing believers to relinquish their civic duties and exercise their rights under Soviet law29.
 In the 1930s, many clergymen fell victim to Stalin's repressions, including Khoren A. Catholicos Muradbekyan (1932-1938), who was killed in his private room by Soviet agents30.
  During World War II, the Soviet leadership softened its tough stance on the church and pursued a policy of favoritism.
 Decision of the Presidency of the Supreme Soviet of the Armenian SSR See, V. Yengibaryan, A. Chakhoyan, Church State and Society Yerevan 2009 Page 16.
 See V. Yengibaryan, A. Chakhoyan, Church State and Society Yerevan 2009 page 20.
 See V. Yengibaryan, A. Chakhoyan, Law of Religion Yerevan Antares 2008 page 37.
 See, V, Yengibaryan, A. Chakhoyan, Fundamentals of Spiritual Law. Union of Judges of the Republic of Armenia, ed. Deacon Arthur Sargsyan. Yerevan Antares 2011 page 46.
 307 JURISDICTION adopted "In 1940, a church meeting was convened in the territory of Etchmiadzin Monastery with the participation of representatives of foreign dioceses31.
  Donations were organized by the church, as a result of which the "David of Sassoun" tank column was created, which assisted the Soviet army in defeating fascism32.
 6. On the modern period of the secular state. The logical continuation of the collapse of the Soviet Union, the attainment of independence, made the re-establishment of new relations between the state and religious organizations on the agenda.
  The Declaration of Independence of the Republic of Armenia established the principle of freedom of conscience, as well as the equality of the citizens of the Republic of Armenia, regardless of nationality, racial affiliation and religion33.
  1991 The current RA Law on Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organizations was adopted, which strengthened the right of conscience of RA citizens to believe in any religion or not, 34 established their equality before the law, regardless of their attitude towards religion or religious affiliation35.
  The Declaration of Independence became the basic legal document on the basis of which in 1995 On July 5, the RA Constitution was adopted.
  1995 Although the text of the Constitution defined the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion36, it was nevertheless open. See Arusyak Terchanyan. The Armenian Apostolic Church during the Second World War, New Life Institute Publishing House Yerevan 2001 pp. 30-31.
 See, Arusyak Terchanyan. The Armenian Apostolic Church during the Second World War, New Life Institute Publishing House Yerevan 2001 page 45.
 See Declaration of Independence of the Republic of Armenia (adopted on August 23, 1991, source: http.
 //www.gov.am/am/independence/).
 See RA Law on Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organizations 1 (adopted: N-0333-1, June 17, 1991, source: RA GKH 1991/12).
 See RA Law on Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organizations 2 (adopted: N-0333-1, June 17, 1991, source: RA GKH 1991/12).
 See RA Constitution (adopted on 05.07.1995, source: http.
 //www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?docID=1).
 308 JURISDICTION The issue of cooperation between the abandoned state and religious organizations.
  In its preamble, the RA Law on Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organizations reserved the status of a national church for the Armenian Apostolic Holy Church, which was enshrined in the Constitution in 2005 and then in 2015, considering secularism one of the key principles of the constitutional order.
 Thus, based on the results of the presented observations, the following conclusions can be presented: a) The Armenian people have historically attached great importance to religion, emphasizing the role of the latter in satisfying its beliefs.
  The attitude towards religion and its infrastructures adopted in the history of Armenia is very diverse.
  In this sense, the Armenian state has passed diametrically opposed stages, having its achievements and losses in each of them.
  The separation of the priesthood from the position of king was the first structural shift in matters of secular and spiritual authority, ending a long period of theocracy.
 b) The state, under the auspices of Christianity, with some exceptions, established partnerships with it, fighting against religious pluralism.
 c) The two-century period of the existence of the First Republic was marked by the active building of state-church friendly relations, which, however, was interrupted by the ideology of Soviet atheism.
 d) At the present stage, the Republic of Armenia is a secular state, where everyone has the right to freedom of conscience and religion.
  We believe that such a format of state development is comparable to the vision of building a democratic, sovereign, rule of law state.
 .
