Crisis management is theoretically viewed in terms of regulating economic instability as well as preventing damage from emergencies.
 In the field of economic activity, theorists use the term "anti-crisis management", when the risks of bankruptcy of micro-level organizations and macro-level of macroeconomic imbalance are targeted.
 172 MANAGEMENT In the case of emergency management, the theory and practice mainly study the risks to the life, health, property, protection of state population, for which complex legal, organizational, awareness and engineering measures are taken.
 In this respect, the crisis management system with its goals is in the cross-section of the functions of both anti-crisis and emergency situations, prevention of man-made accident risks (see Figure 1).
  However, at the same time, crisis management functions are gaining ground in the areas listed above.
 Thus, the emergency warning is the set of measures taken by the executive bodies of the state of emergency and their subjects, local self-government bodies and subdivisions of the Ministry of Emergency Situations of the Republic of Armenia to prevent emergencies or their consequences.
 And emergency prevention is a set of legal, organizational, economic, engineering, environmental protection, social measures aimed at controlling the environment, potentially dangerous objects, preventing the emergence of statistics and the source of the emergency, and preparing and eliminating the emergency [ 1].
 In turn, the management of technical safety is aimed at ensuring the maximum protection of the society and the individual from man-made accidents, production accidents and their consequences in the production and service facilities.
 [2] Naturally, the crisis management system may not fully encompass the scope of the full damage prevention functions expected from anti-crisis economic, emergency, or man-made disasters, and therefore acts as a cross-section (see Figure 1).
  And it is here that in theory the problem arises to clearly delineate that range of intersecting functions, as this largely determines the effective operation of the crisis management system.
  [3] Figure 1 Developing a Crisis Management Framework 1 Anti-Crisis Economic Management Crisis Management Emergency Management Technical Security Management It is important that the management system be able to harmonize as much as possible the effects of crisis, emergency or man-made disaster prevention and reversal. and the harm of negative phenomena should be minimized (see Figure 2).
 In this regard, it is important to clarify the scope of anti-crisis management goals.
  {3} Compiled by the author.
 174 MANAGEMENT Figure 2 General functions of anti-crisis management 2 Crisis management objectives Anti-crisis economic management Man-made disaster management Emergency management Aim for targeting, regulatory impact, systematic occurrence of small probable or unforeseen nature Disasters and emergencies .
  Therefore, crisis management goals include more preventive than post-disaster recovery functions.
  And for these reasons, the management functions are mostly financed by the author.
 175 GOVERNANCE on training, environmental protection, monitoring (see Figure 3).
 Figure 3. Articles of the 2019 budget of the Ministry of Emergency Situations: by programs (million AMD) seismic protection service, monitoring, hydrometeorological services; Maintenance of 1284 rescue units; Therefore, the first stage of the anti-crisis management process is related to the assessment of the likelihood of crisis formation, when regular environmental monitoring is carried out, expert work is organized, information on the possible occurrence of various disasters is collected and analyzed.
 Thus, the National Center for Technical Safety maintains a register of hazardous industrial facilities in order to register hazardous industrial facilities, as well as to record and analyze the necessary information on them and, as a result, to provide summary information to the Authorized Body.
 [2] The register shall contain information on the technical and technological data of the hazardous industrial facility, as well as the results of the technical safety inspection of the hazardous industrial facility.
 The next stage of the crisis management process is related to preventive functions, when as a result of risk assessment the form of potential disasters is identified and management decisions are made to eliminate them.
  As a rule, precautionary and preventive functions are continuous in nature and in the crisis management system have a clear impact on the implementation of successive phased functions (see Figure 4).
 .
