The system of local self-government is a form of formation of citizens formed as a result of civic initiatives and aimed at satisfying their own needs 1, page 9.
  In other words, local self-government is one of the most democratic, internationally accepted and effective ways of organizing and exercising people's power.
  One of the important tasks set before the local self-government system is the organization of local self-government bodies, which first of all means the formation of its internal structure conditioned by electoral processes.
 It is mentioned in the legal literature that local representative bodies are the main element in the modern system of local self-government, they have the leading role 2.
  The most common approach in Western political science literature is 227 JURISDICTION, according to which elections are the cornerstone of social and political processes in democratic societies 3, p. 56.
  Thus, A.E. Postnikov believes that elections ensure the reproduction of state and local government, the renewal on a democratic basis in accordance with the most significant political interests formed by civil society 4, p. 21.
  The idea is right, according to which the will of the people must be the basis for the exercise of power, that will must be expressed in regular and rigged (fair) elections, which must be held by universal and equal suffrage, by secret ballot or by various other means. which ensure freedom of voting քվե5, p. 37.
  According to another description, regular elections are not only a legal-institutional, but also a socio-political, social and economic process, on the basis of which the state and local representative bodies are given the necessary authority for their activities 6, p. 28.
 Elections are, in fact, a necessary component of democracy.
  The electoral system is an integral part of the political system, the effective mechanism of legal establishment and legitimate operation of state power.
 Probably, the legitimate and democratic way of organizing local self-government is the organization of local self-government elections.
  Electoral systems of local self-government bodies are called to ensure the democracy of local elections and the legitimacy of the authorities elected through those elections and the socio-political significance of the elections.
  In most local communities, the only form of direct democracy that is actually oriented and used by the population of the respective community is local elections.
 228 JURISDICTION In other words, local government elections are mainly the only means of influencing the local government.
  Elections ensure the reproduction and renewal of state and local government on a democratic basis, which is shaped by civil society.
  That is their socio-political significance.
  Local elections are considered to be one of the essential guarantees of citizens' political self-affirmation, one of the forms of political self-organization of civil society, which ensures its autonomy, giving it the opportunity to become an independent subject of public power.
 a means of nurturing the expression of interests and at the same time a means of seeking compromise decisions by that group 7, p. 5, 8.
 An important feature of modern electoral systems at the local level is the principles of universal suffrage, secret ballot, which permeate all multilevel normative-legal bases of local self-government elections, from constitutional order to local self-governing body. 137.
 The normative values ​​of local self-government for the member states of the Council of Europe are mainly defined in the European Charter of Local Self-Government.
  The Charter is based on the assumption that local governments formed through fair elections, having the appropriate powers vested in them by law and being closer to the population, can carry out activities and services that are more efficient, taking into account the needs of the population.
 The Republic of Armenia, ratifying the European Charter of Local Self-Government in 2002, has undertaken to develop participatory democracy.
  In the preamble to the European Charter, local self-government is one of the fundamental foundations of any democratic regime, and the right of States to participate in the management of public affairs is one of the principles of democracy which can be exercised directly at local level through elections.
 According to Article 3 2 2 of the European Charter of Local Self-Government, the right to local self-government is exercised by councils or assemblies whose members are elected by free secret ballot, equal, direct and universal suffrage.
  This provision of the Charter has been implemented in Articles 7 of the RA Constitution and Article 1 of the Electoral Code.
  According to the Electoral Code, local elections are held on the basis of general, equal, free, direct suffrage by secret ballot (with the exception of the cities of Yerevan, Gyumri and Vanadzor and, unlike other communities, Yerevan, Gyumri, JURISDICTION and the mayor of Vanadzor are not directly elected. , but from the composition of the Council of Elders, by the decision of the Council of Elders).
 The normative legal regulation of local self-government elections in the Republic of Armenia and the organization of electoral systems include three interrelated levels: 1. General principles and norms of international law and international treaties, 2. Constitutional and legislative legal acts, 3. Legal acts adopted by local self-government bodies , which contain norms on elections 8, p. 53.
 According to Article 2 of the RA Constitution, power in the Republic of Armenia belongs to the people.
  The people exercise their power through free elections, referendums, as well as state and local self-government bodies and officials provided by the Constitution.
  This article allows us to assume that the people belong to the government and the constitutional right to exercise that power directly or through elected bodies.
 The Republic of Armenia, adopting European democratic values, takes into account the instructions and position of the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe when making legislative changes (the Venice Commission is an advisory body of Council of Europe experts on democratic institutions, human rights, constitutional changes, electoral processes). .
 The state electoral processes of the Republic of Armenia, as well as the organization of local self-government elections are regulated by the Electoral Code.
  Thus, the 5th and 6th sections of the RA Electoral Code are dedicated to the elections of local self-government bodies.
 231 JURISDICTION Elections in the Republic of Armenia are held on the principle of publicity 9, page 94.
  The meaning of publicity lies in the fact that elections are prepared and held in public.
 The electoral process in the Republic of Armenia includes a combination of stages defined by law, which consist of certain clear electoral processes.
  The stages of the electoral process are the stages of organizing and conducting elections, within the framework of which the electoral actions provided by law are carried out, as well as the electoral processes that ensure the exercise of the suffrage of the citizens of the Republic of Armenia and other participants in the elections.
 One of the most important stages of the electoral process is the appointment of elections.
  The essence of this stage of the election process is to make a relevant decision and set deadlines by the competent body or official to conduct the elections.
 RA 1995 After the adoption of the Constitution, the first election of local self-government bodies was held only in 1996. November 10 10.
  This was the first and last case when local self-government elections were held on the same day in all communities of the Republic of Armenia  11, p. 69.
  Later, using the grounds for early termination of the powers of the community head and the council of elders, a single day of local self-government elections in the communities was violated, naturally due to the impossibility of personal, legal and political activities and a number of other factors.
  Today, neither the Constitution nor the Electoral Code specifies the exact date of the regular elections.
  According to Article 120 (1) of the Electoral Code, regular elections of a community head and a member of the Council of Elders may be held up to four times a year.
  The Central Electoral Commission sets the voting days for the regular elections of the community head and member of the Council of Elders for each year.
  232 JURISDICTION The regular elections of the head and the member of the Council of Elders are appointed by the regional governor, and the extraordinary elections are appointed by the RA Government.
 In democratic societies, the main beneficiaries of the electoral process are the voters.
 According to Part 2 of Article 2 of the Electoral Code of the Republic of Armenia: 1. During the local self-government elections, the citizens of the Republic of Armenia who are at least 18 years old and have been registered for at least 6 months before the voting day have the right to vote. 2) Citizens of the Republic of Armenia who have not been registered for at least six months before the voting day, who have been registered in the community due to circumstances of demobilization or exemption from imprisonment; 3) Persons without citizenship of the Republic of Armenia for at least one year before the voting day hereinafter referred to as stateless voters).
 Persons who have been declared incompetent by a court decision that has entered into legal force, as well as those who have been convicted by a court decision that has entered into legal force for intentional and especially grave crimes committed and serving a sentence, do not have the right to vote.
 The RA Electoral Code stipulates that one multi-mandate majoritarian constituency is established in the territory of the community during the election of the community council.
 Elections of local self-government bodies in the Republic of Armenia are formed in the following way by nominating candidates for community head and council member.
  Candidates can be nominated by the parties by the decision of their respective territorial (primary, local) subdivisions, as well as the citizens entitled to be elected by self-nomination 233 LAW, with the exception of Yerevan, Gyumri and Vanadzor. The head of the community is indirectly elected from the already elected council of elders.
  It is assumed that allowing parties and party alliances to nominate candidates for Council of Elders will contribute to stronger and more competitive local self-government bodies in the communities.
 The 2011 Electoral Code set an age limit for local government elections, and according to Article 132 1 1 of the Code, a candidate for mayor may be over 25 years old, and a council member over 21 years old may be elected for a community. Persons registered in the population register for at least the last 6 months before the voting day.
  The essence of age censorship is to exclude the selection of a person in the given community, to whom the problems of the given community are directly accessible, therefore incomprehensible and perceptible  11, pp. 79, 84.
  The reservation threshold was also conditioned on that basis.
  However, in 2015 In the new constitutional regulations, neither the Electoral Code nor the RA Law on Local Self-Government provided the age limit for both the mayor and the candidate for the member of the Council of Elders.
  According to Part 3 of Article 48 of the Constitution, the citizens of the Republic of Armenia who have reached the age of eighteen or one day of the referendum, as well as stateless persons in accordance with the law have the right to vote and be elected during the local self-government elections.
  The above suggests that the passive suffrage of a candidate for mayor and a member of the Council of Elders arises at the same time as active suffrage, except for the age requirement for the mayor of Yerevan (Article 42, Part 1 of the RA Law on Local Self-Government in Yerevan: A person who is a citizen of the Republic of Armenia over 30 years of age and is considered a member of the Council of Elders who does not have the citizenship of another state may become mayor).
 Until recently, 2016 Adoption of the RA Law on Local Self-Government, according to the previous legislation (Article 24), the head of the community should have had secondary professional or higher education.
  This norm was not observed by legislative changes, and this requirement has never been set for a member of the Council of Elders, but in our view, the functions of the Council of Elders defined by law in solving issues of local significance can be effectively performed by professionals and experienced management.
 In contrast to the rural and urban communities of the Republic of Armenia, there have been different manifestations of governance in the city of Yerevan.
 Taking into account the peculiarities of the capital, the RA 2005 According to the Constitution, Yerevan received the status of a region (it was not considered a region, but a city with the status of a region and the mayor of Yerevan was appointed by the RA President).
  It was also noteworthy that the mayor of Yerevan was always included in the Security Council under the President of the Republic of Armenia, which meant that he participated in the adoption of important decisions for the state "12, 108".
  However, the RA 2005 During the discussion of the draft constitution, the model of governing the city of Yerevan was criticized by the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe, as the existing system did not allow Yerevan to have a single system of elected local authorities.
  Accepting the mentioned criticism, as well as taking into account other remarks and suggestions of local and international experts, in 2005 Article 108 of the Constitution defined that Yerevan is a community.
  According to 2008 On December 26, 2012, the RA Law on Local Self-Government in Yerevan regulated one of the special features of territorial law 235 LAW.
  Even today, the mechanism of proportional elections is used for the city of Yerevan, that is, political parties and party alliances are nominated as candidates for the Council of Elders, and not individuals.
 2015 The constitutional amendments of December 6, 2016 were followed by the amendments to the Electoral Code in 2016. On May 25, the new Electoral Code was adopted, which also changed the order of formation of local authorities in the cities of Vanadzor and Gyumri.
  According to the new electoral system, the residents of Vanadzor and Gyumri elect by direct voting only the Council of Elders represented by the proportional lists of parties and party alliances, which elects the mayor from among its members (indirect electoral system).
  The proportional list of each party / bloc is headed by the nominated mayoral candidate of that party.
  The number of Vanadzor and Gyumri City Council members was set at 33 instead of the previous 21 (the number of Yerevan City Council members is 65), and in other communities the number of Council of Elders members varies from 5 to 15, depending on the number of voters.
 Thus, referring to the theoretical concepts and definitions of electoral processes, we were convinced that elections today are the only important mechanism that legitimizes the government in a given country.
  It is through the electoral system that democracies form their system of state power and local self-government bodies.
  The role of modern elections is especially important for countries on the path to democratic reform.
  As a result of theoretical and scientific approaches, let's formulate our ideas about the local electoral system. If there are different scientific approaches to the wording of the electoral system, and the legal wording of that term is defined in the national legislations, then the "local electoral system" is not yet a legal term in the national legislation like 236 JURISDICTION.
  According to our observation, the following definition of the term "local electoral system" can be given. The local electoral system is a set of legal norms and principles that regulate the exercise of the right to vote, the organization and conduct of local elections.
 In the context of the RA legislative regulations, referring to the electoral system and legal regulation of local self-government bodies, we present the following observations: 1. It is undeniable that the Republic of Armenia, as a democratic country, established important provisions for the establishment of local self-government system, fixed the people's belonging to the people. its implementation through state bodies and local self-governments.
 State and local authorities were clearly separated from each other, the subordination of one governing body to another was excluded. 2. The formation of local self-government bodies by the community council and the community leader by closed, secret ballot and direct elections guarantees the independence of community authorities. the right to self-determination, as well as the right to self-manage community property and pursue an independent personnel policy; 3. In the context of legislative regulations, the application of electoral systems was clarified.
  Thus, in Yerevan, Gyumri and Vanadzor, the electoral system of the Council of Elders, unlike other communities, is proportional, and the mayors of Yerevan, Gyumri and Vanadzor, unlike the heads of other communities, are not elected by direct elections, but are elected by the Council of Elders. .
  The governing model in Yerevan, Gyumri and Vanadzor is characterized by elements of parliamentary government, and the electoral system is characterized by elements of the proportional electoral system with their own characteristics.
 One of the most important roles in the election process is occupied by political parties.
  On the one hand, it poses some danger in the sense that the struggle of political forces will be continuous in the post-election period as well, with manifestations of decision-making disagreements, delays, disruption of normal activities, as well as lack of decentralization of local self-government system.
  And as V. rightly mentions. Maklakov: "Political parties of different orientations act as rulers or play the role of a loyal opposition, which can turn into a non-opposition force at any time" 12, p. 93.
 In future legislative arrangements for local government elections, we consider: 1. Clarify the educational and age censorship of both the mayor and the candidate for council member, as the mayor, as the executive body, and the council as the representative body, would be expedient and effective. With the right selection of professionals who will have an in-depth understanding of community issues and responsibly address issues of community importance. 2. Referring to the range of entities eligible to run in local elections, it should be emphasized that political parties play an important role in the nomination process. .
  For example, in the proportional system of Yerevan, Gyumri, and Vanadzor, the elected candidates of parties and blocs will be required to provide a certain number of votes to their party or bloc during the national elections, and the autonomy of the local self-government system is also determined by the central government. not participating in political processes.
  As a result, it would also be necessary to legislate the simultaneous application of majoritarian and proportional electoral systems in the system of local self-government.
 3. To regulate the development of an appropriate system for expanding the knowledge and professional training of the already elected community leader and members of the Council of Elders, cooperating with both national and international private and state organizations in this field.
  Providing professional training to the community leader and council members with useful knowledge, as a result, natural compensation will be formed between the community leader and the council, contributing to the effective resolution of community issues.
 Today, the most important of the electoral processes in our country is the legal regulation of the elections.
  The dynamics of the electoral process cannot pass in isolation without taking into account European legal standards and the international experience of legal regulation of the election of local self-government bodies.
 .
