The article discusses the psychological side of the population's awareness in emergency situations, moreover, self-control, coldness, the ability to think soberly in difficult and dangerous situations.
 Analyzing the problems that arise among the population, it can be concluded that often they are psychologically unprepared to act in difficult situations, that is why disorders occur.
 The urgency and urgency of the issue raised in this article is dictated by the implementation of the mentioned problem.
 Emergencies, major accidents and disasters, their unfortunate consequences cause strong emotional tension in people, require high moral stability, resilience and willingness to help the victims.
 Severe devastation, imminent danger to life can disrupt the normal thinking process, weaken, or exclude self-control altogether, leading to unjustified and unpredictable actions.
 The moral and psychological stability of the servicemen, units and non-military formations largely depends on the quality and period of the rescue operations.
  Do groups pay enough attention to psychological compatibility when forming subdivisions?
  Such groups include those who will be most useful at the scene.
  This is probably the most important criterion.
  This is why the leaders of such groups more often feel the need for volunteers who are ready to go to the most dangerous places without hesitation.
  This was the case in Chernobyl, Arzamas, and Bashkortostan, where people consciously took risks, confident that they could manage their own behavior and cope with stressful situations.
 The experience of liquidation of accidents says that extreme situations can motivate a person to actions that he would not dare under normal circumstances.
  Thus, during the Spitakyan earthquake, Muradyan, a previously unremarkable regional employee, showed high self-control during the rescue operations.
  Even after the death of his own family, he continues to carry out rescue work, gathering a group of volunteers around him.
 People who are not psychologically mature have a feeling of fear, which makes them want to run away, or, conversely, is accompanied by muscle tension.
  In such cases, the ability to think normally is impaired.
  The ability to control conscious behavior and thinking, will and emotions is weakened or lost altogether.
  There are a number of changes in a person, both physiological and psychological, which can be quite long-lasting, from a few hours to several days.
  During the liquidation of the consequences of emergencies, the unexpected factors are the unexpectedness of the event, the inability to predict the possible consequences or duration.
 In such cases, lack of experience, ignorance of the rules of conduct, poor moral and psychological training can lead to such consequences.
  [1; 64] A number of measures have been developed to avoid such a situation for people in emergencies.
 First of all, it is necessary to remember that a person who has experienced a severe psychological loss regains mental balance faster when he has to do physical work, and not alone, but in a group.
 Second, in order to reduce the negative impact on a person, it is necessary to constantly prepare for psychology in order to orient oneself correctly in emergency situations, to form psychological stability, to cultivate willpower.
  This is the reason why the main content of psychological readiness is the development and strengthening of the necessary psychological qualities.
  The important thing here is to bring the educational process as close as possible to reality.
 It is especially important to cultivate self-control, coldness and the ability to think soberly in difficult and dangerous situations.
  It is not possible to form and develop such qualities only on a verbal level.
  Only experience can bring the desired results: emotional experience and psychological stability.
  This is why, when conducting relevant exercises with the population and special units, it is important not only to provide a verbal description of the necessary actions, limited to showing movies and videos, but also to reinforce them with practical examples of rescue operations.
 Such events should be organized in a different way, taking into account the importance of each unit and the situation that each individual team may face.
  All this should be done during training exercises.
  The experience of liquidation of the consequences of emergency situations in the areas where the material, spiritual and intellectual resources of the society are concentrated, should be widely used in the phase of preparation of the population for emergency actions.
  We must remember that the level of psychological alienation of people is one of the most important factors.
  Minimal manifestations of fear, especially from the very beginning of an accident or disaster, can lead to irreparable consequences.
  First of all, this refers to officials, who are obliged to make informed decisions immediately, as the responsibility of the whole team is placed on them.
  [2; 96] In such cases, the alarm begins to prevail, which, being transmitted in a chain, becomes an uncontrollable process.
  Man, 19 PSYCHOLOGY In such cases, the person perceives what is happening more emotionally, the responsibility for his own actions decreases, the person stops consciously evaluating his own behavior and adequately reacts to the created situation.
  Lack of necessary information at the right time contributes to the alarm.
  This is a very important circumstance, because as a result of lack of information, false information starts circulating among people, which leads to taking actions that do not correspond to reality.
 As the experience of emergency liquidation shows, the number of victims largely depends on the lack of information, as well as the low level of preparedness for action in such situations.
 The modern conditions in which representatives of a number of professions work, in particular, employees of the Ministry of Defense, the Ministry of Emergency Situations, drivers, nuclear power plant operators, etc., can be called unique, and in some cases also extreme.
 In cases when this situation is accompanied by a real danger to life, it is called extreme.
 Analyzing the problems that arise in the work of the representatives of the above-mentioned professions, it can be concluded that often they are psychologically unprepared to work in difficult situations, that is why disorders occur.
 The application of modern scientifically based methods and techniques of psychological training is a very important circumstance, which contributes to raising the level of psychological readiness in the mentioned conditions.
 Moreover, it is important that such developments are not largely scientific, but more practical.
  [3; 121] Psychological activities under special conditions lead to psychophysiological changes in the body.
  This is due to the fact that this work requires 20 PSYCHOLOGIES great psychological applications.
  In this regard, a not very developed specialist, in extreme conditions, under conditions of prolonged nervous tension, develops a psychophysiological block, which inhibits the speed of the cerebral cortex (the latter is responsible for professional activities).
  A stupor appears.
  Thus, the organism does not allow to get out of the distress mode of activity, which is connected with the involvement of internal resources.
  Such human behavior is conditioned by the fact that there are no extreme conditions in everyday life and, consequently, there is no process of their psychological adaptation.
  This is the reason why a person is not ready for such a level of tension.
 Psychological training for specific and extreme forms of activity - it is a targeted impact on the person with the help of psychological and psychophysiological methods, which is aimed at the formation of adequate actions in such situations.
 By psychological training we mean the psychological and psycho-physiological characteristics of the subject, which ensure the success and efficiency of certain actions and activities.
 From the point of view of psychophysiology, this process can be considered as a preparation of a number of brain systems of the organism, which (systems) will be involved in this or that operation.
  From a psychological point of view, the formation of appropriate physiological organs and new functional systems through the mentioned methods and techniques.
 These individual actions, including purely mnemonic actions (pictorial, mental), allow you to join a certain activity and engage in it.
 Mental exercises are also valuable from the point of view that they are available not only at the individual level, but also during group exercises under the guidance of a specialist.
 21 PSYCHOLOGY Ideomotor exercises help to optimize the neural structures and anatomical substrates of the entire human psychophysiological apparatus, which are responsible for the implementation of purposeful skills that are reproduced in emergency situations.
 Of particular importance is the fact that during these exercises the person focuses on the correct implementation of the action.
  During mental training, as a result of systematic idiomotor exercises, an optimal psychological state is gradually formed, as excessive emotion can lead to mistakes in the actions performed.
 After such exercises, the degree of influence of psychological factors significantly decreases.
  [5; 26] In addition, idiomotor exercises provide a good basis for autogenic training, which is a more complex and time-consuming process.
  It can also be used as a strong psycho-preventive method.
 Ideomotor training, or mental training, is a complete method that can be used individually or in a complex way to ensure the psychological side of the population's preparedness in emergency situations.
  Its use does not require material costs, it is quite easy to apply, and it takes the psychological readiness of activities in extreme conditions to a whole new level.
 .
