Funded by the Cairo branch of the Armenian General Benevolent Union in 2010. "Areg" periodical is published till today, which continues to fulfill the mission of the Arabic supplement of "Arev" daily.
 The main goal of "Areg" periodical, like the Arabic supplement of "Arev", is to strengthen the Armenian-Arab, particularly Armenian-Egyptian relations.
  With the help of the AGBU Arabic periodical, it wants to deepen the cultural ties between the Armenian and Arab peoples.
  In addition to topics with Armenian content, "Areg" periodical also referred to the coverage of various topics with Arabic content.
  "Areg" periodical tried to keep in the center of attention the history and the current state of the Egyptian-Armenian community.
 328 HISTORY Armenians have settled in Egypt since ancient times.
  The golden period of the Armenian community was the Fatimid period (969-1171) and the 19th century.
  In the 4th-5th centuries a number of clergymen left Armenia for Egypt and established a congregation there.
 The number of Armenians in Egypt increased in the middle of the 11th century, when a large number of Armenians left their homeland for Egypt.
  Many of them reached high positions during the reigns of the Fatimid and Ayyubid dynasties.
  "Areg" presents the 9 Egyptian-Armenians who held the position of vizier during the above-mentioned dynasties, headed by Badr al-Jamali.
  The Fatimids were tolerant of Christians, after which a large number of Armenians from neighboring countries arrived in Egypt [1, No 13, pages 6-8].
  The Arabic periodical also mentions and informs about 5 monasteries, 20 churches and chapels in Egypt in the 11th-13th centuries, some of which later turned into mosques during the press and the Ottoman Empire [pages 1, 13, 6-12].
 During the rule of the Mamluks (1250-1517) the number of Armenians in Egypt increased, as in the wars with the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia the press managed to capture a large number of Armenians.
  The press in general also showed tolerance towards Christians, including Armenians [4, pages 52-54].
 The situation of the Armenian community in Egypt deteriorated when Egypt was conquered by the Ottoman Empire, which caused a large number of Armenians to leave Egypt [5, p. 21].
  During the Ottoman rule, Armenians in Egypt lived mainly in Cairo, and some Armenian families in Alexandria and other parts of Egypt.
  If in the 16th century the number of Armenians living in Cairo was 2000, in the 18th century it became 2700-3000 [2, No 127, p. 5].
 The emigration of Armenians from Egypt stopped in the 17th century, when a certain activity was observed within the Armenian community.
  During this period, the Armenians greatly contributed to the revival of trade in Egypt.
  In the 17th-18th centuries, many Armenians held various positions in the administrative and military bodies of the country [1, No 42, p. 4].
 1798-1801 During the French invasion, the situation of the Egyptian-Armenian community deteriorated, which was mainly due to two factors.
  First, the French abolished the trade privileges granted to Armenian merchants, as well as provoked inter-religious clashes in Egypt.
  On the other hand, the Muslim Egyptians considered the Christians living in Egypt to be allies of the French, therefore there were many cases when the Armenians were attacked by the Egyptians [2, No 37, p. 8].
 The situation of the Armenian community in Egypt significantly improved after the coming to power of Muhammad Ali in Egypt.
  1805 Muhammad Ali was appointed governor of Egypt by the Ottoman Empire during his reign in 1805-1869. Egypt experienced an economic, political, and cultural upheaval.
 The Arabic periodical greatly appreciates the activities of Muhammad Ali, who opened a new page in the new history of Egypt and laid the foundation of the Egyptian Nahda (Renaissance).
  The new ruler of Egypt transformed, modernized the state apparatus of the country, the armed forces carried out numerous economic, cultural and educational programs, as a result of which great economic progress was registered in Egypt in the second half of the 19th century [1, No 8, pp. 12-14].
  The Egyptian-Armenian colony also flourished. As its numbers grew, so did its economic, social, political, and cultural life.
  Armenians played a prominent role in the development of Egyptian handicrafts, the expansion of trade ties and the organization of finance [3, p. 13].
 1952 On the occasion of the 63rd anniversary of the revolution in Egypt, "Areg" presents in detail the reasons for the revolution, the process, appreciating the role of the revolution in the modern history of Egypt.
  Indeed, 1952 The revolution that took place in Egypt, as a result of which republican order was established in the country, gave a new impetus to the development and strengthening of the political and economic life of Egypt.
  After the revolution in 1952 On November 16, 2006, Egyptian President Muhammad Naghib visited the Armenian Apostolic Church in Cairo, where he delivered a speech in a meeting with Armenian Archbishop Sirunyan and representatives of the Armenian community, praising the Armenian community in Egypt [1, No 59, 1-6 pages] .
 "Areg" periodical kept in the center of its attention the 2010-2015 period. Coverage of various cultural events and conferences organized by the Egyptian-Armenian community.
 2010 On April 18, the Armenian Cultural Center of Cairo organized a literary evening on the occasion of the Arabic translation of Nubar Pasha's "Memoirs", which was attended by the RA Ambassador to Egypt Armen Melkonyan, Egyptian-Armenian intellectuals and cultural figures.
  "Areg" periodical widely covers the cultural event, during which Ambassador Melkonyan, Arab intellectuals spoke, who in their speeches appreciated the activity and contribution of Nubar Pasha in the establishment of the statehood of Egypt [1, No 2, 2226 pages].
 It is worth mentioning 2011. The international conference dedicated to the history of world printing took place in Alexandria on September 27-29, 2012. Two of the sessions of the conference focused on the history and current state of Armenian printing.
  The topics of the reports on Armenia and Egypt in the sessions on Armenian printing referred to the history of Armenian printing in the motherland, the Ottoman Empire and Egypt.
  The Arabic periodical presents in detail the reports of the conference participants, emphasizing the report "History of Armenian printing in Egypt", which was delivered by Muhammad Rifat al-Imam.
  The speaker mentioned in his report that at the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century Armenians established 14 printing houses in Egypt.
  The first printing house - "Ararat", 1896 Sargis Darbinyan founded it in Cairo, and the first Armenian printing house in Alexandria, 331 HISTORY Nazareth printing house, was founded in 1899.
  After these two printing houses, the Armenians established many other printing houses in Egypt, which they named after the founders (Berberyan, Topalyan, etc.), Armenian geographical names (Sevan, Araks, etc.), famous Armenians (Sahak, Mesrop, etc.) and just ordinary Armenian names. (Arshaluys, Husaber, etc.).
  Armenians also played an important role in the development of the Egyptian press [1, No 16, p. 19].
  1865-2010 165 Armenian newspapers and magazines ("Armaveni", "Neghos", "Arshaluys", "Husaber", etc.) were founded in Egypt, the first of which was "Armaveni" in 1865.
  Currently, four Armenian newspapers and magazines are published in Egypt: "Husaber", "Arev", "Areg" and "Teghekatu".
  During 125 years, about 1560 books and stories on political, religious, cultural and sports topics have been published in Armenian printing houses [1, No 16, p. 20].
  In another report on the history of the Armenian press in Egypt, scholar Suren Bayramyan emphasized that the peak of Armenian publications in Egypt was the 20s and 30s of the 20th century, when 594 printed works were published1.
  In Egypt, Armenians also played a major role in newspapers published in other languages.
  Suren Bayramyan mentions Aristakes Tunyan ("Egyptian Events" in Arabic), Adib Ishak ("Trade" in Arabic), Alexan Sarafyan ("Zhamanak" in Arabic), Tigran Kilimjyan ("New Idea" in Turkish), Alexander Sarukhan ("French Caravan") ) and others [1, No 16, pages 19-23].
 On the occasion of the 150th anniversary of the founding of the first Armenian periodical ("Armaveni") published in Egypt, Perch Terzyan presents the life and activities of the newspaper's editor Abraham Muradyan, provides information about the newspaper's short life (published 4 times) [1, No 55, 3-5 pages].
 2013 Through the efforts of the Armenian Apostolic Church in Cairo, the Arabic version of Suren Bayramyan's book "The Armenian Press of Egypt" was published, where the author presents the list of the Egyptian-Armenian press from 1865-2005.
  The first Armenian periodical "Armaveni" was published in Egypt in 1865, 18652005. 165 periodicals were published in Egypt, 43 of which were magazines and 32 were weekly newspapers.
  See "Areg", 2013 March, No. 33 pp. 3-6.
 332 HISTORY The largest and most prestigious university in the Middle East, Cairo University, 2007 The establishment of the Center for Armenian Studies in April 2006 was of great political and strategic importance in the light of the ongoing process of disintegration of the Armenian communities in the Middle East.
  During these years, the center has organized numerous international conferences, lectures on Armenian-Arab relations, as well as published dozens of books on Armenia and Armenians, the coverage of which is also covered by the Arabic periodical [1, No 53, p. 18].
  "Areg" distinguishes 2010 from the above-mentioned conferences. The conference entitled "Armenian-Arab Economic Relations" held in Cairo on March 29, 2010 was attended by renowned Armenian and Arab scholars.
  Article writer Shima Schwarabi introduces the reader to the course of the conference, during which the speakers spoke about the Armenian-Arab economic relations in the Middle Ages, Armenian figures who played an important role in the economic life of Lebanon, Egypt and Syria [pages 1, No 2, 22-24].
  "Areg" periodical covers 2011 with great interest. The fourth international conference entitled "The Armenian Description in Arabic and Foreign Sources" organized by the Center for Armenian Studies of Cairo University on November 14-15, 2010 was attended by 20 researchers from Armenia, Egypt, Lebanon, Syria and other countries.
  During the session "The Armenian Question in the Ottoman Empire" the speakers mentioned that the Arab authors took a mainly neutral position on the policy of the Ottoman Empire towards the Armenians, presenting the real picture.
  Muhammad Rifat al-Imam notes that in the works of Arab scholars Mustafa Kemal's "Eastern Question", Muhammad Farid's "History of the Ottoman Empire", Faiz Husseini's "Armenian Massacres" and other Arab scholars, the view is that the Armenian massacre
 As for the Arabic press, researchers 333 HISTORY Narine Yeranosyan and Nora Arisyan noted that the Egyptian and Syrian Arabic-language press also had a mostly neutral position and was an important source for studying the history of the Armenian Question [1, No 18, p. 7].
  During the conference, reports were also made within the framework of the topic "Armenians in Egypt".
  In particular, Armenian researcher Arthur Israelyan delivered a report on "Armenians serving in the Mamluk army according to Arab sources", Jamal Kamal Mahmoud on "The image of the Armenian military in Egypt according to Ottoman sources", where the speaker noted that many Armenians in Egypt during the Ottoman rule , held high military positions.
  In particular, Ahmad Ashan, an Armenian, was the commander of one of the 7 military districts of Egypt; Ramadan Ashan, Suleiman Bikr, his son Osman Jalabi and others held high positions in the Egyptian navy [1, No 18, p. 8].
  Also noteworthy is the report by Majid Ajati, an Arab researcher, entitled "Description of Armenian Merchants in Egyptian Archives in the 19th Century," in which he noted that during Muhammad Ali's rule, Armenians held many positions in the Egyptian government [1, No 18, pages 6-11].
 2013 On February 25, the Center for Armenian Studies at Cairo University organized an international conference on "Armenia and the Dialogue of Civilizations" on the occasion of the 500th anniversary of Armenian printing, which was attended by many scholars from different countries.
 The topics of the speakers referred to the Armenian borrowings from Persian, the contacts between Armenia and the Mesopotamian countries, the Armenian-Indian historical and cultural relations, the development of the Armenians in the Egyptian culture and education in 1516-1798. its role, etc. [1, No. 32, pp. 6-12].
  The Cairo Center for Armenian Studies published the work "Descriptions of Armenians in Arabic and Foreign 334 HISTORY in Mani Sources", the 254-page material of which was co-authored by Arab and Armenian co-authors on the following topics: 1. The Armenian question in Arabic and foreign sources.
 2. Armenians in Egypt in Arab and foreign sources.
 3. Armenia and Armenians during the Middle Ages.
 It should be noted that it is true that the fact of massacres is accepted in the works of Arab authors on Armenian massacres, but not all authors agree that it was a state policy.
  The Egyptian and Syrian press also referred to the Armenian massacres.
 Nora Arisyan referred to the publications of the Syrian press about the Armenians in her dissertation, which after studying it becomes clear that the Syrian Arabic-language press referred to the coverage of different stages of the Armenian question, massacres and migration scenes.
  The Center for Armenian Studies has published a separate chapter on "Armenians in Egypt", which includes Amina Ahmad Imam al-Shurubshi's "The Armenian Element in Fatimid Egypt and Its Role in Politics and Civilization," Arthur Israelyan's "Armenian Military Source by the Mamluk Army Jamal Kemal Mahmoud's "Description of the Armenian military in Egypt in Ottoman sources".
  In the third chapter of the book, the Arab scholar Ahmad al-Manam al-Adawi presents "The Political Situation in the Velayat of Armenia in 684-749", which is an important source for studying the history of Armenia during the period when a struggle between Armenia and the Byzantines began for Armenia.
  In addition, this book includes the works of Arab scholars Adb al-Aziz al-Durubi "Armenia and the formation of the Armenian nation", Muhammad Ahmad Ibrahim's works "Armenia in Muslim geographical manuscripts" [1, No 32, pp. 13-18].
 335 HISTORY After being elected President of Egypt, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi in 2014 On August 7, he met with the leaders of the Christian communities of Egypt, including the leaders of the Armenian Catholic and Apostolic Churches, during which the President of Egypt assured that the lives of Christians in Egypt are not endangered and will continue to live and work side by side with Muslims.
  In addition, during the meeting, the leader of the Armenian Catholic Church in Egypt, Grigor Kusan, presented to the President "Armenians in Egypt 1896-1961" authored by Muhammad Rifat al-Imam. The book in which the author presents the history of the Egyptian-Armenian community in the mentioned period [1, No 49, p. 11].
 The commission set up on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of the Armenian Genocide to make the first genocide of the 20th century known to the Arab society in 2015 He held a number of events in Cairo, including lectures and conferences, at various cultural institutions in Egypt, during which films and documents on the Armenian Genocide were shown.
  Among these important events was the publication of a number of booklets on the Armenian Genocide by Muhammad Rifat al-Imam, entitled "The Armenian Question in Arab Sources 1878-1923", "The Armenians of Alexandria and Their Role in Egyptian Life", "The Armenian Question International" in the treaties "," The Armenian Genocide in the Ottoman Empire in 1915-1916 "," The Armenian massacres. The Testimonies of Fayez Hussein "," The Armenian Genocide of 1915. in the American and British press ”and“ The Armenian Genocide in the Memoirs of the Germans and Austrians ”[1, No 57, pp. 7-11].
 It should be noted that after the Hamidian massacres, Egypt provided shelter to more than 1000 Armenian immigrants in 1909. After the massacre of the Armenians of Cilicia, several hundred emigrants, and during the Great Genocide, 4,200 Armenians in Sweden moved to Egypt after a 45-day struggle.
  In addition, about 1,000 Armenian orphans moved to Egypt from other places in the 1920s [1, No 57, p. 13].
 .
