The issue of the relationship between objective and subjective meanings of law is still in the center of attention of domestic and foreign scholars1.
  It is no longer a secret in modern legal literature that law is perceived in objective and subjective senses.
  The purpose of this paper is to show the edges of their relationship, emphasizing the issue of legal protection of the latter.
  Studies in the legal literature [1, pp. 25-34] allow us to state that the legal reality is viewed from two different angles, in one case emphasizing the law as a system of mandatory norms established by public authorities and enforced by the state (objective law). [2, p. 445]), and in the second case, the role of the possibility of choosing the behavior given to the individual (subjective right [3, p. 22] 2).
 In addition to the above-mentioned circumstance, the need to separate law into objective and subjective types is also important in the linguistic sphere.
  For example, in English there is no such problem, because under the objective right the terms "law" are pronounced 3, and in the case of the subjective right - the terms "right", in which case there is no introduction of objective and subjective terms in the linguistic sense.
  And, for example, in Armenian - "right", in Italian - "diritto", in German - "Recht", in French - "droit", in Russian - "right". You can not understand the term "right" without giving a substantive quality (in this case, objective or subjective).
 The word "law" in English also means "law".
 181 JURISDICTION In this case it is a question of the system of legal norms or the legal force given to a person and subject to judicial (or extrajudicial) protection.
 The relationship between the objective and the subjective meanings of law has been discussed in various historical periods, starting with Roman law, which later developed in the continental and American legal systems.
  However, the issue was resolved in German doctrinal sources.
 In the light of objective law, attempts were made by Soviet jurists to deny subjective law.
 At that stage in the development of Russian law, subjective law was declared a term incompatible with Soviet law or, as it was commonly called, inconsistent with socialist relations.
  Some textbooks on the theory of state and law did not even mention references to subjective law [4, С. 105].
  It is emphasized that the subjective right is a bourgeois luxury and it is necessary to fight against it in defense of the interests of the state.
  In this connection G. F. In his research emphasizing the role of subjective law, Shershenevich notes that, unfortunately, from the threshold of the study of subjective law, we already encounter attempts to refute the latter in the legal literature.
  The author also rightly mentions that the resistance to the subjective right existing in the legal literature is nothing but a "struggle against the elephant" and not of its essence [5, С 600].
 Later, the views containing the refutation of the subjective right did not receive adequate support.
 The approaches put forward emphasized the importance of subjective law, excluding attempts to deny it [6, С. 11].
 Moreover, S. F. Kechekyan emphasized that subjective law, that is, the right of individuals, is a necessary concept for the legal system and jurisprudence [7, С. 48].
 Already at the beginning of the last century, some theorists considered subjective law as a whole of jurisprudence, which belonged to the individual on the basis of objective law, which allows to recognize the interests of the individual and provides the possibility of their legal protection [8, С. 28].
 L. should be considered valuable in terms of subjective right. Dugge's attempt to reconsider his conceptual position, in the framework of which, after long-standing denial of the problem, the theorist stressed that the separation of the concepts of "objective law" and "subjective law" is necessary, and the uncertainties considered problematic are clarified and convenient.
  The theorist regretted that the French scholars did not see the necessary differences here [9, С. 1].
 The objective and subjective separation of law can in no case be considered a doctrinal coincidence.
 Such separation, among other reasons, is conditioned by the need to emphasize the social significance of complementary but not identical phenomena.
 The social significance of objective law derives from the essence of law, which is expressed in the regulation of public relations, proceeding from the ideas of justice, freedom and equality, serving the welfare of society and its interests.
 As for the social significance of a subjective right, the approach according to which the social significance of a subjective right is necessary to understand the goals for which the holder of a subjective right is provided with those powers, but those goals should not be in contradiction, is more reasonable in the legal literature. enter with the purposes of legal regulation [10].
 From this point of view, in our opinion, it is necessary to address the issue of the ratio of the terms under discussion also from the point of view of legal protection of objective and subjective rights.
  As we know, one of the real forms of state functions is control, which first of all serves the protection of the objective right.
  Law enforcement is always constrained by an objective right, the constitutional solutions of which are enshrined in Article 6 1 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, according to which "state and local self-government bodies and officials are authorized to perform only actions authorized by the Constitution or laws." .
  Only those elements of objective law give rise to subjective rights which give the right holder a legal opportunity to demand appropriate conduct from the State.
  Not all legal norms provide such an opportunity to the holder of a subjective right.
  Subjective law gives practical significance to the dignity and individuality of a person guaranteed by the constitutional right, enabling him to act independently against the state and demand the implementation of the law concerning him [11, p. 358 - 361].
 From the point of view of legal protection, a right acquires a subjective quality only when the individual is given a legal opportunity to defend it in court (or out of court).
 In this sense, the issue of clarifying the mechanism of protection of subjective rights is important [12, С. 3].
  By the most general definition, the mechanism of protection of a subjective right means the totality of legal means, which is called to ensure the restoration of violated subjective rights, protection of legal interests, settlement of social-legal disputes within the jurisdiction and removal of other obstacles to the realization of the right.
 Subjective rights only give the holder of a specific right the legal opportunity to demand certain behavior.
  In this sense, subjective right exists when the right, in addition to objective public influence, is intended to serve the interests of individuals [12, С. 168].
 184 JURISDICTION The protection of a subjective right is important from the point of view of ensuring the fulfillment of the obligations imposed on the addressee necessary for its realization.
  In short, subjective law provides powers to the subject of law and, accordingly, obliges the addressee of the right.
 When presenting law in subjective and objective senses, we can often find in the legal literature such formulations that in one case it belongs to the subject, in another case it does not [13, С. 759].
  The term "belonging" needs to be clarified.
  It should mean the qualities that the subject should have a real legal opportunity not to exercise his right, to protect the subject of subjective right from unlawful interference, and in the case of objective law, the term "does not belong to the subject" should be understood that it does not depend on the subject's will. at the latter's discretion, and, finally, the objective right cannot have the object of protection that is characteristic of the subjective right, which requires at least the existence of a subject, the existence of a right holder and a real legal opportunity to defend it.
 In research on the field, one can often find the view that subjective law, as a social-legal phenomenon dependent on the subject's will, is characterized as a dispositive right, while objective law is imperative, dictatorial and depends on the will of the legislator [14, S. 28].
  In the case of a subjective right, "will" means the behavior that the right holder realizes during the exercise of the subjective right (an expression of the exercise of the right within the legal possibility of choosing the type and size of the behavior).
  And in the case of objective law, trying to reveal the problem through the word "will", in this case we must mean the will of the legislator, and not the subjective right, the limits of the characteristic freedom of its realization.
 As for the issue of dispositiveness and imperativeness, we think that it is not suitable for discussing the issue of the ratio of subjective and objective rights.
  Considering this issue from that angle is more reasonable and appropriate in the field of assessing the ratio of subjective right and subjective obligation, which was discussed in the previous paragraph.
 If we try to coordinate the problem of the ratio of objective and subjective rights in the most general way, we will have the following picture: 1. objective law is a system of mandatory norms established by public authorities and secured by state coercion, The need for separation is conditioned by the peculiarities of language use (technical justification). 3. Subjective right is a set of powers that enables the recognition of an individual's interests and provides the possibility of their legal protection, and objective right is a set of rules, the obligation to follow does not depend on the right of claim. .The separation of objective and subjective meanings of law is conditioned by the difference of the social significance of the latter. 5. From the point of view of legal protection, objective law is under the control of public power, and subjective law gives powers to the subject of law and obliges the addressee of the right.
 .
