It is a well-known fact that in the conditions of the rule of the totalitarian regime in the Soviet Union, there was an atmosphere of fear in the USSR due to the strict control, unprecedented censorship, as well as the slightest deviation from the one-sided communist ideology.
  This research was carried out with the funding provided by the SCC of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Armenia within the framework of a scientific topic with the code 16YR-6A057.
 364 HISTORY was sharply manifested in the Stalin years.
  Even well-known and influential individuals - statesmen, writers, scientists - more often preferred to forget some episodes of their past, avoiding to speak out about their activities until the establishment of the Soviet regime.
  There are many such examples.
  It is quite natural that the cruel "laws" operating in the country during the Soviet regime did not bypass the Armenian writers and intellectuals, whom it is easy to accuse or even reprimand for keeping the silence, but that approach means bypassing the principle of history.
  Literary critic Davit Gasparyan rightly writes in this regard. "By forgetting and even denying the past, an attempt was made to portray the socialist daily life of the people from the position of new ideological demands, and then the socialist construction and construction" [10, p. 6].
 The great Armenian writer, historian Derenik Demirchyan (1877-1956) also avoided H. Յ. From joining the ARF and speaking out about its activities in the First Republic of Armenia.
  If in his "Autobiography" written in the early 1930s he hints at 1920. On holding office in Yerevan [6, 7-8], then bypasses that fact in the extensive "Autobiography" written in the post-war period [12, pp. 285-300; 13, pp. 7-20].
  As for the fact of joining the ARF, D. Demirchyan does not even hint about that.
  Moreover, he writes. The perception of the idea of ​​Soviet power came to me in 19-20, when I was told (in Menshevik Tbilissi) about the Bolsheviks, who "greatly contribute to culture, art and science."
  So when the Bolsheviks came, I was somewhat politically prepared.
 However, there was still a lot to regulate in the creative plan ”[13, p. 13].
  E. Kept in the Charents Museum of Literature and Art, D. The documents kept in the "Correspondence related to Demirchyan's tenure" section of Demirchyan's personal archive (they were handed over to the state protection by the Demirchyan family) refer only to his activities during his years as a scientific secretary at the Art Department of the Institute of Literature and Art.
  There in 1917-1920. There are no documents on the writer's social and political activities, including being a member of the ARF and especially during his tenure during the First Republic of Armenia.
  By the way, in both the Soviet and post-Soviet years D. In works dedicated to Demirchyan's life and works [15, pp. V-VIII; 24; 9, 16; 17, pp. 5-23; 22; 11; 19; 14, pp. 506-508] these realities have not been addressed.
  It can be assumed that, in all probability, these facts were not known to the Demirchyan scholars, especially since the writer also tried at all costs to bypass, to forget those pages of his biography, which were not only undesirable from the point of view of the ruling ideology, but could be fatally fatal to the writer. as was the case with a number of his colleagues.
 The documents discovered in recent years shed new light on these issues.
 Let us inform you from the beginning that we do not know when D. Demirchyan joined H. Յ. To the ARF.
  Our efforts in that direction have not yet led to a practical result.
  It is clear that in 1917 By September, he was already a party member.
 1917 In the conditions of excitement caused by the February revolution, from September 29 to October 13, the Armenian National Consultative Assembly (congress) was convened in Tbilissi (Georgia) with the participation of representatives of different classes of Eastern Armenians.
  Among the participants of the latter was also D. Demirchyan.
  In the list of delegates, it is written in front of his name that he was from Tbilissi (Georgia), a member of the ARF, and represented the Armenian Writers' Association [21, p. 105].
  D. Demirchyan was the only representative of this organization at the congress.
  Well-known intellectuals (Leo, Avetis Aharonyan, Hakob Manandyan, Harutyun Surkhatyan and others) were among the participants of the conference.
  To be fair, judging by the minutes of the sittings, D. Demirchya 366 HISTORY took an active part in the work of the conference. He did not speak on the issues under discussion.
  By the decision of the Assembly, the Armenian National Assembly of Russia was established as the "supreme representative body" of the Eastern Armenians, and the executive body of the latter was the Armenian National Council consisting of 15 members, chaired by ARF figure, writer-publicist Avetis Aharonyan, secretary Nikol Aghbalyan.
 Before that, in 1917. In May, Derenik Demirchyan took an active part in the Armenian Teachers' Assembly convened in Tbilissi (Georgia).
  By the way, at the May 14 sitting of the congress D. Demirchyan was instructed to say a word of respect in the church during the fortieth ceremony of the death of the poet Alexander Tsaturyan (1865-1917) to be held on the same day.
  Demirchyan performed the assignment properly.
  He was offended by the fact that the clergy had forced him to wear a church shirt during his speech.
  Informing about this at the May 15 sitting of the Assembly, he emphasizes that "he was powerless to oppose, wanting to have made the statement of the Assembly by all means."
  The participants of the congress condemn the behavior of the clergy (Manuk Abeghyan speaks more sharply) [23, No. 108, 112].
 D. The next episode of Demirchyan's social-political activity, which was left out of the writer's scientific biography, refers to 1918. His activities in Yerevan in May.
  Those fateful days for the Armenian people, when the Armenians, who had become one fist, were fighting to the death against the Turkish armies in Sardarapat, Bash-Aparan and Gharakilisa. Demirchyan was one of the intellectuals who called the soldiers and the world soldiers victorious battles with public speeches.
  Along with the prominent figure of the Armenian Liberation Movement Aram Manukyan, well-known pedagogue Arshavir Shavarshyan and other Armenians, D. Demirchyan, calling on the population "without height, class 367 HISTORY, discrimination of political beliefs and occupation, get weapons, go to the front and help the fighting army" [8, p. 32].
  We do not know any other details in this regard, our attempts to find archival documents about this have not yet been successful.
  There is also no information in the writer's autobiographies and studies of Demirchyan scholars.
 Quite different, the 1920s are more complete. In September-December in Yerevan D. The information we obtained about Demirchyan's activity.
  Those documents were issued in 2014. We have published in the "Historical Journal" of the National Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Armenia [25].
 There is an important evidence in the memoirs of the well-known literary critic Tigran Hakhumyan. about the activity in Yerevan.
 He writes that in 1920 In the months following the discussion of the writer's collection of poems "Spring" in Tbilissi (Georgia), they no longer met D. Demirchyan.
  It was heard that he had moved to Yerevan to work at the Ministry of Public Education and Arts, directing works related to art and literature, but they had no information about the results of his activities.
  One of the students at the Hovnanyan School in Tbilissi (where the writer taught Armenian language and literature before moving to Yerevan) said that one of Demirchyan's letters from Yerevan "has no pleasant lines other than dissatisfaction" and that his efforts had not yet yielded the expected results [18, p. 220].
  In other memoirs written about the writer's life and activities, we have not found information about his activities in Yerevan.
 Taking into account the demand of the time and taking as a basis the 1919 decision of the RA Ministry of Public Education and Art (it was established in November 1918). Proposal of July 4, 2006 The Government of the Republic of Armenia adopted a law on July 17 on the reorganization of the Department of Antiquities and Art of the Ministry into two departments: Preservation of Antiquities and Art Sponsorship [5, p. 1-2; 20, pp. 144-145].
  On July 18, RA Minister of Public Education and Art S. Tigranyan met with former Minister G. 368 HISTORY Melik-Gharagyozyan was offered the position of the head of the newly created Art Department.
  On July 23, the latter gave his consent on the condition of staying in Tbilissi (Georgia) for some time.
  However, he did not fulfill the functions of the head of the department, and at the end of August he resigned from that position [2, 13-15 rounds].
  Then for a short time (until November 1) the duties of the head of the Art Department were performed by musicologist Sargis Barkhudaryan [4, 12 rounds].
  However, as it seems, there was no new appointment after him. Ministry of 1920 The head of the Art Department is not mentioned in the January 2013 staff list [4, 25].
 1920 After defeating the anti-Soviet forces in the North Caucasus in the spring of 1918, the Red Army of Soviet Russia moved to Transcaucasia.
  On April 28, Soviet rule was established in Azerbaijan.
  Encouraged by this fact, he aroused hopes among the Armenian Bolshevik figures that they could achieve the sovietization of Armenia.
  1920 The anti-government uprising that broke out in Alexandropol, Kars and other regions of the republic in early May of 2007 was quickly suppressed by the authorities.
  After the uprising, the government led by Hamazasp Ohanjanyan preferred ARF members when making appointments in various spheres of government.
  In this situation, well-known writer, ARF member D. was also invited from Tbilissi (Georgia). Demirchyan.
  The latter later testified that he felt an obligation to come to the homeland and serve his own people and its newly established statehood [6, p. 7-8].
  Minister of Public Education and Art Gevorg Ghazaryan 1920 By the order of September 17, D. Demirchyan was appointed head of the Ministry's Art Department on September 1 [25, pp. 194, 196].
  His salary was 18,800 rubles.
  The writer lived in Yerevan at 11 Sadovaya Street.
  He moved to Yerevan alone without a family. His wife, Mariam, and son, Vigen, continued to live in Tbilissi (Georgia).
  From the savings of a low salary and the food he received as a state official, he also sent to his family members [25, pp. 194-195].
  In those years, in parallel with the low-wage 369 HISTORY salary, officials were provided with a certain amount of food.
 From the study of the newly discovered documents we see that the Art Department headed by Demirchyan was doing an effective job (unlike the previous one).
  Evidence of this is the various courses conducted by a number of well-known intellectuals of the time.
  Thus, in the drama courses organized by the department in September-November, Vardan Mirzoyan (head and teacher), teacher Derenik Demirchyan, choreographer Suren Mkhitaryan, psychology teacher A. Shavarshyan.
  In November, Sargis Barkhudaryan, a "theory teacher," and Anna Abgaryan, a "Dashnak teacher," were in charge of the department. 54 et seq., 127-130].
  It is worth noting the fact that the mentioned courses took place in 1920. During the Turkish-Armenian war, when not only the independent existence of the republic but also the physical security of the Armenians was endangered.
 It contains irreplaceable information about the works done by the art department in 1920. On December 16, D. addressed to Ashot Hovhannisyan, the People's Committee of Soviet Armenia. Demirchyan's extensive autograph report.
  Here is presented the situation of the branches of art during the RA, in particular, the organization of theatrical work, actors in this field O. Sevumyan and V. Mirzoyan's works, the activities of the drama school operating in Yerevan, the conservatory in Yerevan, and the actions aimed at establishing a music school in Alexandropol, S. To organize group courses under Barkhudaryan, 1919 About the painting exhibition organized in Yerevan, the support provided by the state to Armenian writers and artists.
  Demirchyan emphasized the lack of a suitable building for a theater in the capital (parliamentary sittings took place in the hall of the former club), the existing plans to postpone the Turkish devastating campaign (military, folk concerts, performances, organization of local creative groups, etc.). ) [25, pp. 196-198].
 D. Demirchyan also held office in the first days after the sovietization of the Republic of Armenia.
  1920 December 2, RA Minister of Public Education and Art V. After Minakhoryan's resignation, on December 3, Poghos Sotnikyan, Assistant to the Minister, was temporarily acting director of the Public Education and Arts Commissariat of Soviet Armenia. 21 rounds].
  After the formation of the new government, the newly appointed People's Committee of Soviet Armenia Ashot Hovhannisyan in 1920. By the order of December 15, 2012, four senior employees of the former RA Ministry of Public Education and Art, which had been transformed into the People's Commissariat of Enlightenment, were dismissed. Sotnikyan, Head of the Art Department D. Demirchyan, school supervisors S. Shkhyan and A. Shahnazaryan.
  They received their liquidation benefits from the cash fund of the state treasury on December 21 [25, pp. 195-196].
  D. Demirchyan was replaced as the head of the Art Department on December 15 by the already well-known poet Yeghishe Charents [1, 1 district].
  We think D. Demirchyan's dismissal was crucial to his dismissal.
 Thus, based on the newly discovered facts, we can conclude that the prominent Armenian writer, ARF member Derenik Demirchyan in 1917-1920. He carried out noteworthy activities, about which, during the Soviet years, for understandable reasons, he avoided speaking out.
  These pages of the writer's biography are left out of his scientific biography.
  In fact, in 1917. In May, he participated in the Armenian Teachers' Assembly, and in September, in the Armenian National Consultation.
  1918 On the eve of the May heroic battles, we see him in Yerevan calling Aram Manukyan to fight the Armenian population. From September 1 to December 15, 1920 he was the head of the Art Department of the Ministry of Public Education and Art of the Republic of Armenia 371 HISTORY and had a remarkable contribution in 1920. in the matter of organizing the cultural life of the Republic of Armenia in autumn.
  Certainly, the new documents that will appear in the future will increase our knowledge as D. in the period in question. New still unknown pages of Demirchyan's biography will be revealed.
 .
