cMtsurk is one of the capitals of Great Armenia in Taron province.
  It was the first residence of the Armenian Arshakuns from the second half of the 1st century to the new capital of King Vagharsh, Vagharshapat, in the 2nd century. the last.
  In the 1st century, when Artashat could not play its former role due to its destruction and security reasons, the Parthian Arshakuns had to choose an Armenian throne city as close as possible to their empire, on the southern border of Armenia.
 The name Mtsurk (Msur) in Akkadian means border, beyond the border ([1], p. 157), that is, from the point of view of the southerners, beyond the Mesopotamian border, beyond, in this case, in Armenia.
  Later, when the Armenian throne became the heritage of the local Arshakuns, the latter returned the capital to the Ararat plain, Vagharshapat, Artashat, Dvin, again Vagharshapat, etc., dictated by the Armenian political interest.
  Unfortunately, the capital Mtsurn was unjustifiably neglected in the information literature, being considered the royal city of Sanatruk or one of its residences (see [2], v. 7, p. 638 (Mtsurn); v. 10, p. 176 (Sanatruk)).
  Յ. Marquardt and H. Manandyan attributed its foundation to the Arshakunis, and P. 195 Ananyan and G. Abgaryan was considered Mtsurn.
 However, all the observations should be brought together and the data of Pavstos Buzand, Movses Khorenatsi and Sebeos should be re-emphasized.
 Only Pavstos knows that Mtsurk is different from Mtsbn and was allegedly built by King Sanatruk at the confluence of the Euphrates (Aratsan) and its left tributary (Meghraget) (Pavstos Buzand, ch. 14).
 Probably abandoned and uninhabited already in IV-V centuries. during 363 As a result of Shapuhi's destructive invasion, as H. Manandyan and P. Ananyan.
  Movses Khorenatsi and Sebeos do not know that city and confuse its name with Mtsbni.
  What was known about Mtsurk, M. Khorenatsi attributed it to Mtsbni.
  That is, according to M. According to Khorenatsi, the first capital instead of Mtsurk was Mtsbin during the Arshakunys. The Mtsurk earthquake was in the city of Mtsbin, and its rebuilt became Sanatruk (M. Kh., II, ch. LZ) and not the founder, as Pavstos writes.
  After all, the city existed a long time ago and was declared the capital by the first king of Arshakun, Trdat.
  Khorenatsi had to declare Armenian Edesia as his capital during the reign of two foreign cities of Vagharshak. During Abgar, first Mtsbin, after which we see the capital in Armenia during Sanatruk.
  But without giving the name, because Khorenatsi writes. "After his death, the kingdom of Abgaru was divided into two Armenians. For his son Anun was crowned king of Edessa, and his cousin Sanatruk of Hays ”(Movses Khorenatsi, II, LD).
  It can be seen from the further narration that the capital remains the former Armavir (Movses Khorenatsi, II, LT), followed by Yervandashat, after which there is talk about the founding of Artashat.
 In fact, if the multinational Edesia, as the capital of Armenia and the residence of King Abgar, was programmed by M. For Khorenatsi, because the first Christian king Abgar ruled, according to him, in Armenia, therefore the capital was also there, then Mtsbin, as the Armenian capital, has no program value and is especially the result of confusion.
 It is already an accepted fact in Armenology how Mtsurn was confused with Mtsbn during the writing ([3], pp. 147-153, as well as notes 9, 52), and N. See the opinions of Akinyan and other philologists ([4], p. 194, note 9, pp. 203-204, note 52).
  If M. If Khorenatsi had known that Mtsurn was the residence of 196 Vagharshak, we would still have found Abgar in his place in Edesia, after which Sanatruk would have returned the throne to Mtsur, from which there would have been no conceptual change.
 Moreover, the historian would not have had to invent two Mtsbnapats based only on the well-known folk method of verifying names.
  The first is that King Vagharshak's envoy is Assyrian, hence his name Mar (= Lord) Abbas, who finds a book translated from Chaldean into Greek by the order of Alexander the Great from the long-destroyed archive of Nineveh, from which he collects Armenian materials and in two languages, Greek and in Assyrian, presents it to Vagharshak, who records some things.
  In fact, it turns out that the writer of the original Armenian history is a native Assyrian, that is why the historian preferred to call her not a philosopher like Sebeos, but Katina, who easily emerged as a result of the distortion of the word Katipa (= scribe), as he noted. P. Ananian ([5], pp. 50-51).
  Not to mention that in the list of names Mar, Abas's name is missing M. Khorenatsi In most of the Assyrian "History" manuscripts, the pens brought it closer to the real Assyrian Maribas.
  The author of a 6th century Assyrian "Chronicle" is also known by that name.
 The other motto that supposes M. Khorenatsi comes from an Armenian literary and pronunciation version of the name Mtsbin, Mtsu, which was probably explained by the etymological Khorenatsi method again on the basis of the Armenian language. Mtsuin <Mtsuu, which means one fragment, to be counted.
  Thus, in ancient and medieval Armenia, the decimal part of a coin could be called.
  Probably, combining this meaning with an anthem of the city of Mtsbin, in which he was shown a coin, the historian considered that the sculptor depicted King Sanatruk, who allegedly spent his entire treasury to rebuild the earthquake-stricken Mtsbin, and left it to him. Only one snake, from which the name of the city, Mtsu, is supposed to have originated.
  In fact, Sanatruk rebuilt the town of Mtsur in Taron.
  By the way, since the occasion 197 was presented, it is worth mentioning another etymological legend used by M. Explaining the name of Khorenatsi Sanatruk, as if given by Sanot.
 Sanatruk's nanny Sanot, who is Byurat Bagratuni's sister and Khosren Artsruni's wife, falls into a blizzard with the child and, buried in the snow for three days and nights, keeps him in the warmth of his thighs until he brings them out from under the snow cover. the white apostle is an apostle ”(M. Kh., II, LZ).
  The miracle of coming to light is related to the scientific etymology of Sanatruk according to the Iranian scholar A. Perikhanyan (Sanat-ruk = rising light, but also illuminating, or, from the point of view of myth, probably the rising morning as the nickname of one of the gods) pp. 81-82).
 No matter how much the historian Sanatruk almost entangles himself in mythical and imaginary plots, trying to artificially connect his works with Mtsbn and verify his name in Armenian, the historical Sanatruk is forever connected with the reconstruction of Mtsurn, as Pavstos and the early Christians testify. as evidenced by Sandukht's testimony, first of all in the name of the heroine, which means the daughter of Sani (Sanatruk).
  Both testimonies, the Mtsurn capital and the virgin Sandukht, securely place Sanatruk in the 1st century. recently.
  That is the reason why the historian appointed him next in the 1st century. Christian King Abgar, making him an outcast and a persecutor of Christianity.
 This indirectly confirms that I d. Recently, there was a Christian community in the Armenian capital Mtsurn.
  We say indirectly, because what is said about Mtsbni, according to the opinion accepted in Armenology, can be attributed to Mtsurn.
 Մ. Khorenatsi Mtsbin would never have been associated with Mtsurn by Armenologists if the other version of the name of the author of the "Early History", the philosopher Maraba Mtsurnatsi, was not preserved in Sebeos' "History", from which it becomes clear that Khorenatsi Mar Abbas is not Mtsbnatsi but Mtsurn.
  It is true that Sebeos also confuses the two cities, but there is evidence that helps to distinguish Mtsurk from Mtsbin. "At that time, Arshak, the son of Arshak the Younger, reigned over the Armenian world in the city of Mtsbin" (Seb., P. 53).
 This is followed by the enumeration of the Armenian borders, after which Arshak sends 198 little Arshak "to Mrtsanay vs. the West ..." (p. 54), which seems to suggest that Arshak Pokr's residence Mtsbin was in fact Mtsurn.
  And a little later, while presenting the list of the Armenian and Parthian princes, Sebeos writes: "Now King Arshak the Younger, the twenty-ninth of the one hundred and ninth king of Arshak, reigned over his father in the city of Mrtsuin in Armenia ..." (Seb., P. 54).
  This evidence also confirms that even though Sebeos did not realize it, the author of its source, Marab, distinguished the two cities very well.
  If so, the question arises as to why the name of the first king is different in the two versions of the same source. according to M. Khorenatsi Mar Aba, Arshak Partev's younger brother Vagharshak reigns in Armenia, according to Sebeos Maraba, Arshak Partev's son Arshak Pokr.
  The problem is also interesting because in the VI century. Greek historian Procopius of Caesarea, citing his source as "Armenian History", according to Adonts, referring to Pavstos Buzand, writes that the first king of Arshakun in Armenia was Arshak, the brother of the Parthian king.
  It turns out that Procopius, having unique information, is partially similar to both. one by name, the other by blood ([8], p. 280).
  Why is that?
  Is it because in the ancient sources of Marab Mtsurnatsi and similar sources the name Arshak is used as a royal title, accepted in the court of the early Arshakuns as a tribal heritage from an older tradition?
  The question can get a certain positive answer, if we take into account M. The origin given to Vagharshak by Khorenatsi.
 In that case, it would be natural to differentiate between two and more Arshak according to the degree of blood relationship or the order of seniority.
  Where did it come from in the mind of the historian? After all, two sources are called Arshak (Sebeos, Prokopios).
  The key to the explanation is again hidden in the fictional Mtsbnapatum.
  According to the logic of the historical father, if the capital is Mtsbin, the one sent to Nineveh is the Assyrian scribe Mar Abbas, then the ordering king is the first Arshakuni in Armenia.
  As such, it is natural that he would like to know the history of the former owners of the country, to recognize the ancestral works of the rulers of that country.
 According to Khorenatsi, the function of the first person who ordered "History" is specific to the first person to the throne, therefore, if the name of the ordering king is known, then the name of the first ruler is also known.
  Probably in the information mentioned in the memoir of the author of "Early Armenian History" Marab mentioned that the client-recipient of his work was the Armenian King Vagharsh, who sat in Mtsurn in the 2nd century before the establishment of the new capital. recently.
  This was the Vagharsh, during which the Armenian throne was declared the heritage of the local Arshakunys, therefore, a demand was born to have the history of their own country.
 It is worth mentioning that another act attributed to Vagharshak by Khorenatsi belongs to the historical Vagharsha.
  It was the proclamation of the Armenian throne as the heritage of the local Arshakunis.
  Մ. Khorenatsi writes. "And since he had many (Vagharshak - AS) students, he did not give a proper credit to everyone in Mtsbin (read Mtsurk - AS) for which he sent them to live in the province of Hashten and in its gorge, which is its border. outside Taron ... And only his first son ... keep him ... and his ostra ... And it came to pass after this, and afterward in the law of Arshakunyats, that the only son should dwell with the king, to be the viceroy of the kingdom ... »(M. Kh., II, ch. Y).
  It is especially noteworthy that he considers the area allotted to non-heirs to the throne "external Tarono".
  What does Taron have to do with it, if we do not notice Mtsurn, which was located in Taron, which was considered a place of worship, instead of the name Mtsbin?
 In fact, both Khorenatsi and Sebeos, considering Mtsbin as the capital instead of Mtsurk, fall into contradiction when Mtsurn is sometimes mentioned instead of Mtsbn.
  In the case of Sebeos, the example of that self-contradiction is clear and is given above, and in the case of Khorenatsi, we find an example of self-contradiction in the expression "external Tarono" mentioned in the order of residence of the heir to the throne, because the trace of Mtsurk is hidden there.
  Where did the mentioned historians get the traces of the real Mtsurn?
  Near Sebeos from Pavstos Buzand, near Khorenatsi from both Pavstos and Marab Mtsurnatsi.
 We think that the book of the historian will not suffer, but will benefit, if we read "Mtsbin" in it "Mtsurk", except for a few cases, 200 which refer to the real city of Mtsbin, for example, Hakob Mtsbinatsi, a parking lot of Persian or Greek troops (M. Kh. ., II, ch. DZT, III, ch. E, KE), Idols of Mtsbni leading to Edesia (II, IE).
 Thus, the fruit of Vagharshak logic, considering the name with it M. Comparing Khorenatsi with the historical name of Trdat, the first king of Arshakun in Armenia, it will be accepted that "Arshak" of Sebeos and Prokopios has a title origin.
  And which is more preferable, son or younger brother, we can say the second, taking into account that the blood of the real historian Trdat and the data of Khorenatsi, Procopius prove in favor of the brother.
 Let us not forget that the king of the country, who depended on official interstate relations, addressed Suzeren as his elder brother or father, but already independent of blood.
 Turning to Mtsurk, let us say that the memory of that historical city has remained not only in the name of its famous citizen and in the 14th chapter of Pavstos Buzand IV school, but also in the folk epic tradition as the city of Miser known from the topography of "Sasna Tsrer", the residence of Msra Melik.
  Mtsur> Msur transition can be assumed during the Arab rule as a result of foreign influence.
  Like Mtsbin <Nisibin, Mutsatsir <Musasir and others.
  Indeed, on the one hand, the epic is characterized by a narrow local geography with historical names, no matter how much the epic fictional space includes vague and distant places, which have a different function in the poetics of the folk novel.
  The epic scholars, ignoring the Mtsurk-Messer identity, made a futile attempt to place the city of Messr on the far shores (Mosul, Messr = Egypt), instead of seeing it right next to Sassoun, with which the Batmana Bridge marks the border (see [9], p. 520 ).
  It is clear that at the stage of the formation of the epic, the country of Misra Melik, which was adjacent to Sasna, was inhabited by Arab tribes, that is why two former Armenian-populated provinces, Sasun and Mtsurk (= Messir), were opposed.
  The fact that the rival country is named after its center, the city of Messier, is also significant, something that is also related to the former glory of Mtsurk.
 201 Today, that glory can rise from the rubble if archeological excavations are carried out at the place mentioned by Pavstos, and if the person and work of his only known citizen, Marab, are valued according to real merits and not according to dubious Armenologists who formed their ideas about Khorenatsi. according to.
 So, who is the philosopher Maraba Mtsurnatsi or Mar Abas Katina Mtsbnatsi?
  He is mentioned once by Sebeos in the preface of the memoir.
  The quote is made according to our reorganization. "Looking there through the books of the Philosopher of Maraba, the Mtsurnats, which I found in Mesopotamia, I wanted to talk to his disciples about the time (and five years) * of the kings of Armenia and Parthia, which [some of them] saw inscribed on the statue of St. , towards the royal temple, covered by the royal pillar of the ruin.
  For the pillar of the temple was then requested at the door of the king of Persia, and was opened for the sake of them, and the inscription on it was inscribed on the stone with Greek inscription, for this had the title: "I, Agatangeghos pen ..." and so on.
  Sebeos used the name of the author of the book with a sexual connotation, the direction of which should be the philosopher Marab Mtsurnatsi.
  St. Malkhasyan presented brief descriptions under the heading of Sebeos, where the publication of the History Chapter endowed the content, the second of which was titled as follows: "The Book of the Philosopher of Maraba Mtsurnatsu".
  St. Since Malkhasyan considered the direct form of the author's name to be Marabay, not Marab, the researchers automatically continued to call it that way, not noticing that all three members of Sebeos' extensive contributor were taken by consensus.
  That is, if the direct form of the name were Marabay, it would be the energetic contributor of the philosopher Marabay Mtsurnatsu.
 A literary supplement according to paragraph I of the memorandum, which can be qualified as a mechanical repetition.
 202 Let us now examine M. Khorenatsi's testimonies, which are number seven, are at least one in title.
 1. "And he found the Assyrian army of Mar Abbas Katina, a wise and learned Chaldean man, and in Greek writing, which he sent to his brother Arshak the Great as a worthy gift, to open the king's chariot for him" (M. Kh., I, ch. Y).
 2. "And perceiving the letter of Arshak the Great in the hands of Mar Abain Katina, he ordered with great seriousness to take the throne of the king who was in Nineveh" (M. Kh., I, ch. T).
 3. "In this book, Mar Abbas Katina, the only true story of our nation, brought to King Vagharshak in Mtsbin in Greek and Assyrian script.
  Zor took ... Vagharshak ... put the yarkunis in storage ... and stamped the part of what was ordered ”(M. Kh., I, ch. T).
 4. "But though not in the books themselves, but as Mar Abas Katina tells us, from a few and without a sign, from this cow found this meeting in the royal court" (M. Kh., I, ch. 14).
 5. "It seemed to us more certain that in Mar Abayne Katina is an examination of the Chaldean book than this, because he says in my style and explains the reason for the war" (M. Kh., I, ch. 17).
 6. "As soon as the bank of old Mar Abay Katina is exhausted" (M. Kh., II, ch. T).
 7. "If therefore you know the story follows the book of Mar Abay Katina" (M. Kh., II ch. Ժ).
 In comparison, it is easy to notice that the special name, when taken directly, with direct or accusative syllables, gets the Greek suffix (N 1, 3, 4), and when taken with the gender syllable, the Greek suffix is ​​absent only in the second conjunction. and is the third, and the allocative members are agreed upon by the consonant (N 2, 5, 6, 7).
  Meanwhile, it was expected that the sexual form would be Marai Abay Katina.
  The Mar form, when used directly, seems to suggest that it was associated with the name "Abay" in the Khorenatsi spring, as with Sebeos, Marabay.
  This confirms that the historian himself divided the name Marab analytically to show that it is the Assyrian word Mar (Lord).
  But if we accept that Khorenatsi is still in the 5th century. registered a case of consonantal disagreement, which could have been 203, for example, the determiner was put in a straight line and the definite in a sexual form, then in such a case we should legally get the direct, in this case, the only direct form assumed from "Abay" is Ab, which Although it leaves the well-known word "Aba", it also reminds of the meaning of "father".
  And it turns out, Lord Father, that a special name could not be considered.
  The name Abbas, which became common in the Arab era, is also excluded.
  In fact, as already mentioned, the "Early Story" that reached Khorenatsi under the name of Marab was in Greek, traces of which can be seen in both the words of Marabas, the philosopher, and other original signs (eg, Cadmus, Titan, Habetoste, etc.).
 The Assyrian trace comes from M. Khorenatsi confused Mtsbin with Mtsurn, although orientalist N. Marn also noticed Semitic traces in the Sebeosian version of Maraba ([10], pp. 289-290, 299).
  In response to the latter, N. Adonts writes. "They talk about the Assyrian origin of Maraba's book.
  This view, inspired by the Assyrian name of the philosopher, is less convincing.
  The biblical lines that have been pointed out have long since ceased to be merely the product of Assyrian literature.
  If Marabas or Kadmos are Assyrian names, but they are Greek anyway ”([8], p. 289).
 Thus, after separating the Greek ending, when it turns out that the Assyrian word is not possible at the base, it remains to consider the name Armenian, Marab <Merab <Mehrab and with more transitions (hmt. Iranian: h. B, p. (Zohrab = red water, reddish ), h. G, page 313 (Mehrab = sun + water, sunshine)).
  In other words, it turned out that in the common source of Khorenatsi and Sebeos there was a scribe of the same name, Marab, a scribe from Mtsurn.
  This was probably a royal scribe, a connoisseur of international languages ​​and received an order to write the initial history of Armenia from the Mtsurn court, when Vagharsh II was king.
 .
