Legal regulation of economic relations, provision of effective means of activity for economic entities is one of the priorities of modern states.
  In the behavior of the participants in the developing economic relations, however, there are sometimes "deviations", the elimination of which, in ensuring structural changes in the economic system, the institution of bankruptcy is undeniable, which is a unique legal mechanism of state intervention [1, p. 23].
  With the help of the Bankruptcy Institute, it is possible to remove the unscrupulous participants in the property system from the economic system and to redistribute their material resources among the honest participants in public relations [2, p. 90].
 The institute that has become the subject of research is, in fact, a special manifestation of the state's intervention in ensuring the normal course of economic relations.
 In the modern era, there are two independent systems of settlement of legal relations arising during bankruptcy proceedings [3, p. 21]: a) Procurement system, the primary purpose of which is to protect the interests of creditors.
  Great Britain and Germany belong to this system.
 b) Accounts receivable system, the main purpose of which is to restore the debtor's solvency.
  This system includes the United States and France.
 The current structures of legal regulation of bankruptcy proceedings differ from each other for the purpose set by the laws of different states, in particular: 1. to maximize the claims of creditors, 2. to save the surviving economic entities, 3. to distribute funds fairly between the parties, 4. to reorganize still unresolved company, etc. [4, p. 34].
 Thus, the primary task of one legal system is to meet the demands of creditors to the maximum (Manfreda Baltz model), the other is to save business entities and preserve jobs (English model) [5, p. 41].
  The Armenian legislator adheres to the third model, which gives preference to the balanced protection of the interests of creditors and debtors.
 As a result of judicial reforms implemented in the Republic of Armenia, in 2018 It was adopted on February 7, 2019. Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia 218 JURISDICTION The Constitutional Law of the Republic of Armenia enters into force on April 9, 2019. A new specialized court, the Bankruptcy Court of the Republic of Armenia, started operating in the Republic of Armenia on January 1, 2010.
  In such conditions, the elaboration of legal structures guaranteeing the effective activity of the RA Bankruptcy Court, the study of the legal bases ensuring the economic reforms implemented in the Republic of Armenia becomes more than relevant.
 The free development and equal legal protection of all forms of property guaranteed by the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, the freedom of economic activity and free economic competition indirectly condition the need for a detailed legal regulation of the institution of bankruptcy.
 As a result of a comprehensive study of the RA Law on Bankruptcy, it becomes clear that the RA legislator distinguishes between two types of bankruptcy proceedings: voluntary and forced.
 In the framework of voluntary bankruptcy proceedings, the debtor, who is a natural person, sole proprietor or legal entity, voluntarily, on his own initiative, submits an application to the court to declare himself bankrupt.
  It is noteworthy that the RA Law on Bankruptcy distinguishes between the grounds for voluntary and forced bankruptcy.
  Pursuant to Article 3, Part 2, Clauses 2 and 2.1 of the RA Law on Bankruptcy, the court may declare the debtor bankrupt on its own initiative, if the debtor's obligations, including obligations subject to public legal monetary claims, are defined by law. exceed the value of the debtor's assets by a thousand times the minimum wage or more.
 The legislator has established a certain court procedure for declaring the debtor bankrupt.
  Part 1 of Article 16 of the Bankruptcy Law of the Republic of Armenia stipulates that no later than three days after receiving the debtor's voluntary bankruptcy application, the judge shall make a decision to declare the debtor bankrupt without convening a court session, 219 JURISDICTION appropriate grounds.
 Unlike voluntary bankruptcy proceedings, in case of forced bankruptcy, the legislator has established two different court procedures for declaring the debtor bankrupt, without defining the cases of their application. In one case, within fifteen days after accepting the application in accordance with Article 16, Part 2 of the Bankruptcy Law of the Republic of Armenia, the judge shall appoint a court session, during which the examination of the submitted application and the court shall declare the debtor bankrupt or reject the application. and in the other case, the next day after receiving the application for bankruptcy in accordance with Article 17 (1) of the Bankruptcy Law of the Republic of Armenia, the court sends the decision to accept the application to the debtor, proposing to challenge his bankruptcy in writing within fifteen days.
 In our opinion, such contradictory regulations proposed by the legislator are incomprehensible.
  We believe that in case of forced bankruptcy proceedings, the legal procedure proposed by Article 17 1 1 of the Bankruptcy Law of the Republic of Armenia is acceptable, as in the absence of a relevant objection by the debtor, the court may consider the application without convening a court session and if there are grounds provided by law. to make a decision, while in the case of voluntary bankruptcy proceedings, the court is constrained within three days, without taking into account the position of the creditors, to make a decision either to declare the applicant-debtor bankrupt or to reject the application.
 Moreover, within three days it is not reasonably possible to notify the creditors about the acceptance of the application for voluntary bankruptcy and to get the position of the latter 220 JURISDICTION on it.
  In this case, in fact, the court, being constrained by the existing legal requirement, conducts a one-sided examination when examining the application for bankruptcy on its own initiative, thus involuntarily violating the creditors' right to a fair trial.
 In such circumstances, we propose to make a corresponding legislative change, which will allow the court to convene a court session after accepting the application for voluntary bankruptcy, ensuring the proper notification of the creditors mentioned in the application about the court session.
  In this case, in fact, the creditors will also have the opportunity to present a position on the bankruptcy application and defend their legal interests.
 When initiating voluntary bankruptcy proceedings, the legislator imposed a procedural obligation on the applicant debtor to submit a list of debtors' creditors attached to the application, indicating the amount of obligations owed to the latter, their term of fulfillment and other necessary information (Article 12, Part 1 of the Bankruptcy Law " point).
 We believe that the court should be obliged to notify the creditors named of the existence of voluntary bankruptcy proceedings, in which case the creditors will not only have the opportunity to express their position on the application, but also after declaring the debtor bankrupt, will not be deprived of the objective to file a claim within one month. from opportunity.
 It is especially important to establish structures to properly inform creditors of voluntary bankruptcy proceedings.
  Thus. The RA legislator has set a period of one month 1 for the creditors to submit their claims to the court, beyond which the information on declaring the present debtor bankrupt, appointing a manager and the first meeting of creditors is published by http.
 The official website of public notices of the Republic of Armenia located at //www.azdarar.am and posted on a specially allocated place in the court building.
 221 JURISDICTION has certain adverse legal consequences for creditors.
  Moreover, the non-submission of their claims by the creditors during the bankruptcy proceedings leads to the fact that the latter are deprived of the opportunity to file a claim against the debtor in the future.
  It is noteworthy that the RA Constitutional Court on 27.01.2015 Paragraph 2 of Part 2 of Article 90 of the Bankruptcy Law of the Republic of Armenia “On Bankruptcy” made in 2005 by the decision SDO-1189, regarding the restriction of the right to file a claim against the financially recovered debtor, recognized 2005. Contrary to the requirements of Article 18 of the RA Constitution and invalid.
  In fact, the financially recovered debtor is not exempted from fulfilling the claims of creditors who did not file claims in court.
 In practice, situations are possible when creditors, realizing that the debtor will not be able to meet their claims financially during the bankruptcy proceedings, do not maliciously file a claim in court with the aim of obtaining a claim in the future.
  The absence of creditors' claims in the bankruptcy case is a basis for the debtor to be recognized as financially sound on the basis of a court decision made in accordance with Article 89 of the Bankruptcy Law of the Republic of Armenia.
  In this situation, in fact, the meaning of voluntary bankruptcy proceedings is devalued.
 We have studied individual cases of voluntary bankruptcy, which have been completed on the basis under discussion.
  For example, in the case of voluntary bankruptcy CC 2/0064/04/17 regarding Arman Senik Nersisyan, the Court of General Jurisdiction of Syunik Marz of the Republic of Armenia on 25.07.2017 Bankruptcy case was terminated on the basis of the bankruptcy trustee's mediation on the basis of no claim by the creditors, and in the final part of the decision it was determined that Arman Senik Nersisyan is released from fulfilling all monetary obligations, according to Article 22 of the Bankruptcy Law of the obligations defined by part and article 97 and the case registered by the decision of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia No. SDO-1189 of 27.01.2015.
 It is noteworthy that other cases of voluntary bankruptcy were also completed on the above-mentioned basis, in particular, EAKD / 0379/04/16, ARD / 0008/04/14, EADD / 0063/04/12, ARAD / 0007/04/12.
 In such circumstances, it is proposed to make an appropriate legislative amendment, in which case the creditors' malicious failure to file a claim in court if the creditors are aware of the voluntary bankruptcy proceedings, will be grounds for depriving the debtor of the right to file a claim against the debtor.
  Naturally, creditors who are not notified of the debtor's bankruptcy proceedings in accordance with the law (not being included in the list of creditors attached to the application by the debtor, not receiving the notice sent by the court and on other reasonable grounds) will not be deprived of the legal opportunity to file a claim against the debtor.
 Moreover, we believe that in order to guarantee the rights of creditors to file a claim outside the law within one month, it is necessary to set a minimum period of voluntary bankruptcy proceedings, which, in our opinion, can not be less than one year.
 Thus, summarizing the results of the research conducted within the framework of this article, we suggest: 1. Rewrite Part 1 of Article 16 of the RA Law on Bankruptcy as follows: «1. The court shall convene a court session within fifteen days after receiving the application for voluntary bankruptcy, about which the applicant-debtor and all the creditors mentioned in the application shall be duly notified. ”
 2. To supplement Article 89 of the RA Law on Bankruptcy with Clause 3 with the following content: "The debtor's voluntary bankruptcy proceedings may not be terminated within one year after the decision to declare the debtor bankrupt."
 3. To supplement Article 90 of the RA Law on Bankruptcy with point 2.1 with the following content: "2.1 Creditors duly notified by the court of the debtor's voluntary bankruptcy proceedings shall be deprived of the right to file claims against the recovered person, except for the cases provided for in parts three and four of this article."
 .
