Today, more than 5,000 racial, ethnic, linguistic, religious, and cultural groups are part of a total of 189 nation-states.
  Most of the violent conflicts in the world are related to the struggle for autonomy or independence of this group.
  Most of the world's population would prefer to leave their country at the first opportunity.
  Millions of activists around the world join or in some way support separatist movements, which bear various names: self-determination, independence, autonomy, and so on.
  Separatist movements are widespread all over the world, so modern Europe is not left out of it.
 The main precondition for separatism is nationalism, as, as a rule, separatism is directly related to any kind of nationalism.
  At different times, theorists have given different types of classification of nationalism, so we will try to discuss the types that are related to separatism.
 According to nationalism, a well-known theorist E. According to Smith, nationalism is of two main types: territorial and ethnic.
 Territorial nationalism is based on the concept of citizenship, while ethnicity is based on genetic unity [1, p. 76].
 A. Khachatryan thinks that depending on who aspires to leave the state, separatist movements can be.  national, when nations or ethnic minorities living within a state try to create their own nation-state, which, unlike an existing state, will serve their interests, or to unite with another state, which is usually the external ethnicity of the separatists. the homeland.
  National separatist movements are widespread throughout the world and are one of the most common forms of separatism.
  regional, when a region of a state, for one reason or another, wants to become independent or join another state.
  For example, Lega Nord (Northern League) fights for the independence of Padania in northern Italy, and Lega Sud (Southern League) fights for the independence of Ausonia in southern Italy.
  Religious, when a religious group has expressed a desire to have its own state or to unite with another state with which it has a common religion.
  In such cases, the religions of the separatist religious group and the dominant group in the state are more often different [2, p. 76].
 Although there are many types of nationalism, but M. Hechter distinguishes 4 types of nationalism. 1. State-building nationalism, when the state tries to pursue the policy of assimilation of different cultural territories or communities, as a result of which the central authorities try to create a multicultural society, which over time can be assimilated and become a homogeneous cultural state.
  State-building nationalism also has geopolitical significance, as it unites a number of cultural groups and makes them more protected, but the downside is that in the context of this homogeneity, some cultural norms may disappear or merge with other cultures to create other ones. norms.
 2. Peripheral nationalism occurs when separate cultural groups living on the outskirts of a state try to secede or apply to unite in a state with the same cultural characteristics.
 3. Irredentist nationalism is manifested when a state tries to expand its existing borders at the expense of the territories occupied by a neighboring state, as its bloody ethnic communities live there.
  Irredentist nationalism often manifests itself when the rights of their blood relatives are violated in the neighboring country, or certain pressures are exerted on them.
 4. Unifying nationalism is manifested when two groups that are politically divided but have the same cultural characteristics try to unite in the territory of one state [3].
 Thus, discussing the principles of classification of separatism by different theorists, it can be stated that there are many types of European separatism and we have tried to present the most common of them.
  When classifying the types of separatism, we noticed that almost all theorists distinguish between ethnic or national separatism.
  Turning to history, we can say that ethnic separatist movements have been relatively more successful.
  Not all of them have achieved their goal, but given their demands and the resistance they have caused, 559 POLITICS, systemic change and other consequences, it can be unequivocally stated that the national separatist movement is one of the most powerful types of political movement.
  Meanwhile, in the same historical times, non-national separatist movements were doomed to failure.
 Linguistic and peripheral separatist movements also have a unique role in European separatist movements, which are a predominant factor in a number of European separatist movements, so we will try to study these types in more depth.
 In modern Europe there are many ethnic groups that are part of different countries.
  E. Gellner argues that ethnicity enters the political sphere in the form of "nationalism" in a day when the economic basis of public life demands cultural homogeneity or continuity, and when cultural class differences become detrimental while ethnocentric class differences remain. tolerable [4, p. 116].
 One of the vivid examples of ethnic separatism is the collapse of the USSR, after which a number of countries created an independent state, which differed from each other in culture, customs, religion, language and other features.
  The post-Soviet space was not free of civil wars, ethno-political conflicts, and separatist movements accompanied by large-scale violence and deportations.
  Most of the latter also succeeded.
  Thus, if Abkhazia, Nagorno Karabakh, Transnistria gained de facto independence, then Ajaria, Tatarstan, Bashkiria were satisfied with wider autonomy.
  The only failed separatist movement that led to prolonged clashes and bloodshed was the Chechens.
  The Chechen separatists, pursuing only full independence, although they declared the creation of an independent state, Ichkeria, nevertheless failed to achieve their 560 POLITICAL SCIENCES.
  Russia managed to preserve its territorial integrity, albeit by military means.
  2003 Chechnya holds constitutional referendum and presidential elections.
  In both cases, the outcome was satisfactory for the Kremlin, and the Chechen conflict seems to be coming to an end, although the regular explosions remind us that such an end is not enough for the separatist forces.
 In most of the separatist movements in Europe today, the ethnic factor is present, but in many of them it is not considered a predominant feature.
 The ethnic factor is to some extent expressed in almost all separatist manifestations in Europe.
  In ethnic separatists, there is a greater risk of conflict between ethnically different groups.
  As for the ethnic separatism of the Turkish Cypriots, it can be stated that this separatism is strongly supported by Turkey, which, by inciting nationalist sentiments among the local Turks, is constantly trying to increase its influence over the island of Cyprus.
  Despite the large amount of aid provided, Turkey still uses these territories, as there are favorable conditions for investment.
 Linguistic separatism is manifested when there are different language groups within one state, which try to separate from each other, create an independent state or join another state.
  Ջ. Sorens finds that linguistic separatism, in general, can be considered a component of ethnic separatism, where linguistic specificity is more pronounced than other components - religious, cultural, etc. [5, pp. There are many linguistic separatist movements in Europe, and the last country in Western Europe to emerge as a result of linguistic secession is Iceland, which in 1944. withdrew from Denmark.
  The linguistic factor plays a big role in many movements in Europe today, but it is not considered to be the main motivation in all of them.
 The linguistic peculiarity is highlighted by the fact that the main concern of the separatist groups is that they fear that their national language may be assimilated and disappear over time.
  To prevent this danger, these ethnic groups are demanding autonomy, as was the case with Corsican separatism, or the amendment of the state language by amending the constitution, as was the case with the ethnic-linguistic separatist groups in Belgium.
 Peripheral separatism also has a special place in European separatist movements.
  Some theorists believe that the suburbs want to secede for two main reasons. 1. the periphery finds that it receives relatively little financial assistance, which leads to the impoverishment of that region; 2. the peripheral region finds that its resources are used by the central government [6, p.4].
 Peripheral separatism is very common in Europe, in particular we will try to study the manifestations of separatism in Spain, where the peripheral factor is paramount.
  The Spanish nation was formed mainly as a result of the assimilation of the natives of the Iberian Peninsula and the peoples who conquered the peninsula.
  Ethnic groups such as the Romans, the Sufis, the Vandals, the Visigoths, some Germanic tribes, as well as the Arabs and the Jews took part in the process.
  There are several ethnic groups in Spain that have retained their cultural and linguistic independence.
  These include the Catalans (16%), the Galists (7%), the Basques (2%), whose self-name is euscal, and the nomadic Romans (gypsies), who are also called scholars.
 562 POLITICS It can be stated that the ethnic factor also has a special role in the Basque suburban separatism, as they are distinguished by their customs, culture, etc.
 However, if the Basque Country were not in the southeastern part of Spain, their separatist manifestations might have been weaker.
  In contrast to the Catalan separatists, whose main reason is that their income goes more to the central government and they receive less allocations, the main goal of the Basque separatists is to increase funding from the Spanish government, which is declining amid the unrest.
 The EU has always opposed separatist manifestations, as the independence of any of them could set a precedent for other separatist regions as well.
  In that case, Europe would become more divided, relations between the breakaway regions and the central government would be strained, which would lead to increased instability in Europe.
 It can also be concluded that ethnic-religious groups are also more active in separatist movements, which view secession as an inter-religious conflict and try to present this conflict in the international arena as a violation of national religious rights.
 .
