There is an intensification of online learning in the 21st century university education system.
  And the reason is not only the unprecedented development of information technologies, but also the "crisis" of the traditional educational system, which is becoming noticeable nowadays.
  On the one hand, there is an increase in the demand for online education in the information society, on the other hand, the problems of distance learning design are not yet fully addressed in the university education system.
  In this regard, e-learning technologies are currently being improved and we believe that 69 MANAGEMENT should take into account not only the advantages of traditional teaching but also the advanced capabilities of modern online learning technologies.
  These trends are observed in surveys conducted among students participating in online learning modules, when 60% of respondents prefer to receive distance education without attending university at all, and 22% prefer to take classes BLENDED (a combination of traditional and online learning).
 Therefore, the problem now is to use the latest educational tools to transfer traditional e-learning environment to the e-learning environment so that the individual involved in distance learning programs in the university environment feels as student as possible, finds learning attractive and interesting, values ​​his / her presence in the university system. meet the requirements of the information system and present itself in the labor market as a competitive graduate.
 The “crisis” of traditional university education The traditional university education, perhaps having a history of six centuries, is currently being used with some unchanged components.
  Until today, students attend universities in regular groups according to the established schedule, participate in lectures and practical work, spending most of their time in the university environment.
  As in the past, now the direct contacts of students with the teaching staff, which have not only educational but also educational significance, are highly valued.
 The academic environment at the university has always "polished" the student, giving him the behavior appropriate to an intellectual, qualities typical of a human citizen, humanitarian baptisms.
  In this respect, attending university from the Middle Ages to the present day is an honor and an academic pride for every individual.
  At the same time, however, online education today opposes this tendency to attend universities, which, by giving the student professional qualities, seems to remove him from live contacts in the academic environment and transfer education to the Internet, and courses to the electronic field.
 And it turns out that traditional university education, with all the above advantages, is currently experiencing a "crisis" as the number of students enrolled in distance learning programs on the planet grows, who have relatively passive university attendance and prefer to be taught. in the electronic environment.
 In our opinion, the current "crisis" of traditional university education has a number of reasons.
  First, if in the past the university was a source of knowledge and a forge of epistemology, now that role is gradually giving way to the Internet.
  If in the past, the key motivation for students to attend university was the acquisition of knowledge, now it is possible to get it on a larger and faster way from the Internet, where, by the way, the range of both theoretical and practical information is growing year by year.
  And it is not accidental that in modern conditions the teaching staff can not "compete" with the online in terms of providing mass knowledge-based information.
 Besides, the knowledge formed in the information society age is becoming obsolete faster than in the recent past.
  And if in the industrial society the graduates used the knowledge gained during four or five years of university education for decades, now, before graduating from university, the epistemological information of education often starts to become obsolete and does not correspond to the dynamic changes of labor market demands.
  And it turns out that going to university and studying for years contains certain risks of acquiring "rapidly obsolete knowledge", so the requirement of an individual's presence in the university becomes irrelevant in those respects.
 The social isolation of the individual, which has become more pronounced in the information society, also contributes to the deepening of the crisis of traditional university education.
 Currently, young people spend most of their leisure time online, partly preferring electronic rather than live social interactions.
  Naturally, the situation of social isolation makes online learning rather attractive than traditional.
 Finally, online learning about traditional university education is also beneficial in terms of time savings in the organization of education.
  In distance learning programs, students do not waste time on the way to university, are able to show flexibility in joining and exiting the online learning process, they build their own learning time, show a high degree of self-organization, which is somewhat limited in traditional learning. defined from above ”academic schedules with a strict schedule, etc.).
 Methodological Challenges for Improving Online Learning However, online learning is not perfect in methodological terms either. which is mentioned many times in professional literature.
  Thus, among the disadvantages of distance learning is that  there is no direct communication between the learner and the teacher,  it is difficult to create a creative atmosphere in the group of learners, and when there is no one next to the learner who can inspire him / her, it can have a very negative effect on learning. 72 MANAGEMENT  high demands are placed on the organization and management of the learning process, the task of targeting the listeners is quite difficult, շարք a number of individual and psychological conditions are needed, as well as strict self-discipline, which directly depends on the learner's independence and self-awareness.
 Որոշակի Certain professional practical skills can be acquired only by doing real (but not virtual) practical and laboratory work.
 ։ Teaching through communication technologies leads to the isolation of students, reduces the control by the lecturer.
 Սովոր Students are not always ready for intense, effective independent work, self-organization, are able to personally plan academic work, lack self-discipline.
  [2] The shortcomings of online learning can also be indirectly attributed to the organization of traditional learning, but the above-mentioned academic shortcomings are more pronounced during distance learning, and in this case it is necessary to organize the module design process to minimize the risk of learning disruption.
  In this regard, we offer key principles for designing an online learning module that are interconnected and should operate simultaneously throughout the module teaching period (see Figure 1).
 73 GOVERNANCE Figure 1 Key principles for designing an online learning module 1 Feedback promotion Leadership lectures Prevention of social self-isolation Promotion of self-organization with multimedia tools Not having the opportunity to attend classrooms .
  In this regard, when designing any module, the lecturer's words should be heard, when the teacher presents the purpose of teaching, the expected learning outcomes in terms of "knowledge-skills-abilities" in a video message.
  Then the video message addressed to the student should present the student's learning methods, assessment approaches and other organizational tips and guidelines related to the course.
 Compiled by the authors.
 MANAGEMENT The series of guiding lectures is also important, which should be videotaped if possible, otherwise in PDF text format.
  Having ample opportunities to obtain epistemological information from the Internet, however, without instructional lectures, the student will be entangled in the "information web".
  In this regard, thematic and targeted lectures are required during distance learning, which guide the student in choosing the alternative information available on the Internet related to learning.
  Therefore, the presence of guided lectures is a mandatory principle in the process of designing an online module (see Figure 1).
 Distance learning is characterized by the risk of developing a "boredom symptom", but which can be overcome with the use of active multimedia tools (see Figure 1).
  Being in an "electronic" environment and not feeling the warmth of an academic live audience, listening to a series of distance lectures, doing e-exercises alone, not enjoying the praise of the lecturer or classmates addressed to him, the distance learning just becomes boring for the student.
  It is here that the design of the teaching module should use profitable signals that will stimulate learning.
 These can be the ranking scale of the student group included in the distance learning module, regular presentations of the learner's progress position, earnings of emotional visual cues in solving the correct exercises, multimedia incentive awards, etc.
 Promoting self-organization is also an important principle in the design of online learning.
  In the field of education, self-organization is more successful in adult age groups, and it is more risky among young people.
  Therefore, any distance learning module 75 GOVERNANCE should be accompanied by a special instruction detailing the schedule of e-tests, current and final exams, webinars, and on-line group debate club hours.
 The requirements for maximum and minimum hourly student presence on the Internet for each module are also noteworthy.
  The student should not take a passive position in the case of webinars, online debates, which can be monitored in those learning processes on the Internet by his actual time presence.
  On the other hand, students are presented with the maximum limits of being on the Internet when solving tests, e-exercises or exam questions.
  Naturally, such time constraints on online learning will force the student to self-organize and exercise effective time management.
 The prevention of student social self-isolation risks is also taken into account when designing an online learning module.
  In this regard, the teaching of the module should use videotaped teaching materials, webinars, student debate on-line forums, group assignments and programs that will guide the teaching process and will not lead to distance learning through self-isolation (see Figure 1).
 The most important part of the logical chain of application of the above principles of designing the online learning module is the provision of feedback in the "student-lecturer", "student-student", "student-electronic dean's office" communication channels.
  The effective organization of distance learning largely depends on the smooth operation of the feedback channels, through which the traditional teaching is able to make a smooth transition to the e-learning environment, establishing constant contact with the main beneficiaries of the educational process (faculty, student groups, university administration, etc.).
 .
