Introduction.
  Anthrax, as a zoonotic disease, has always been in the center of attention not only of health and veterinary medicine workers, but also, being considered an infectious disease of socio-economic and strategic importance, has interested people in various occupations.
 At present, in the field of practical veterinary medicine, vaccine No. 55 made from attenuated and decapitated anthrax (Bacillus anthracis) is used with high epidemiological and immunological efficiency.
  Despite its high efficiency, however, it is not without its drawbacks.
  In addition, in recent years, anthrax strains that do not conform to a typical strain in nature have been found to be able to overcome specific immunity and infect even vaccinated humans and animals, 102 as well as strains of Bacillus anthracis that are resistant to the currently used antibiotic. , 2].
 Taking into account this circumstance, one of the approaches that will lead to the promotion of natural factors of stability of the macro-organism is important.
 1996 Academician A. Galoyan's discovery of proline-rich polypeptides isolated from the neurosecretory granules of the hypothalamus is a new set of hypothalamic neuropeptides that are thought to regulate the activity of the body's immune system.
 The brain not only regulates the functions of the immune system, but is also one of the organs of that system.
  Bio-synthesis data of new cytokines (PRP-proline rich peptides) and a number of interleukins in the neurosecretory neurons of the hypothalamus (N. paraventricularis and N. supraopticus) show that the hypothalamic neurosecretory nucleus on anthracis [4,8-10].
 In case of injection of both antibodies and antibodies of bacterial origin, immunobiological processes take place in the macro-organism, which primarily affect the fractional composition of proteins, therefore in our study we paid great attention to the dynamics and degree of change of proteins, their components, as proteins in the body. perform a number of functions. They maintain osmotic pressure, blood pH, are carriers of hormones, nitrogen compounds, carbohydrates and have a certain role in the nutrition of various tissues of the body, in immune processes [11].
 Blood proteins are significantly associated with antibodies that cause the body to be particularly intolerant, which is manifested in the body's immunity and infectious diseases.
  Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the total serum protein and protein fractions of the blood of white mice infected with anthrax and injected with galarm during immunization.
 Material and method.
  Non-linear white mice with a mean weight of 18-20 were taken for the study, and gram-negative vaccine for anthrax strain No. 55 was injected subcutaneously in grams of body weight at a predetermined minimum lethal dose (50 million spores).
  Galarmin, the primary structure of which is Ala-Gly-Ala mcg / mouse, was administered intramuscularly for 10 days and 16 to 30 days after blood was drawn from the heart to determine the body's immune status during childbirth, such as total serum protein and protein fractions.
 The protein material consists of albumin and globulin, which differ from each other in their physicochemical and biological properties.
  The physicochemical properties of blood serum antibodies and C-globulins are so close that their molecular masses and isoelectric points coincide.
 By electrophoresis, proteins were separated into five fractions: albumin and α 1-, α 2-, β- and -globulins.
 Results and discussion.
  The results of the examination of total protein and protein fractions in the blood serum of healthy mice infected with anthrax strain N 55 with a share of 50 million spores are given in Table 1 ten days after injection.
 Table 1: Concentrations of total protein and protein fractions in the blood serum of white mice 10 days after vaccine injection Protein fractions Protein fractions Albumin protein Globulins Globulins 30 days (g / l) 10 days after test (g / l): normal - Mice infected with anthrax vaccine strain # 55.
 Apparently, as a result of injecting the used vaccine into the body, there is a change in the total protein in the blood serum and its components.
  Compared to the norm, the total protein content increased by 19.3% after vaccination.
  A significant decrease in albumin concentration by 14.7% is noticeable.
  The amount of globulins increased significantly not only due to the decrease in albumin, but also due to the increase in the total protein concentration.
 A study of the total serum protein and protein concentrations of white mice infected with anthrax vaccine No. 55 and receiving galarmin at the same time showed that, in contrast to the control, which is observed 30 days later compared to normal protein, the above component concentrations increased and there is a tendency (Table 2).
 Table 2 Total serum protein and protein Total protein of whole mice infected with anthrax vaccine No. 55 and receiving galarmin at the same time Globulins Protein fractions after 30 days (g / l) Globulins Protein fractions after 10 days (g / l) -increase in the amount of globulins, then it is reflected in the increase in the concentration of antibodies.
 106 mg / dm Immunoglobulin G concentration in the blood serum of white mice, mg / dl.
 A - 10 days, B - 30 days.
 1- norm (healthy mice), 2- control (mice infected with anthrax vaccine strain # 55), 3- experimental (mice infected with anthrax and receiving galarmin).
 Conclusion.
  In the blood serum of white mice infected with anthrax strain No. 55, the content of albumin decreases, and the concentration of total protein and globulins increases.
 By the way, the increase in the concentration of immunoglobulins occurs both due to the decrease of albumin and the increase of globulins.
  Mice given galarmin 30 days later have a tendency to normalize these parameters.
 .
