Conservative democracy according to the theory of the founding professor A. Leiphart is mainly used in heterogeneous societies, where there is a multiplicity or segmentation of the society and the conflict-related problems caused by it.
  This is the essence of consociationism - to ensure the involvement of all segments of society in the process of public administration and decision-making by sharing power within the political system.
  However, as a result of the basic research of the theory, the question arises whether it is also applicable in homogeneous societies, where we are dealing with a homogeneous ethnos and from the point of view of division there does not seem to be a problem of social fragmentation [1].
  The second question is why riots and revolutions start in the societies of a number of homogeneous states and what is the problem in general?
 The reasons may be different: in one case the problems are based on socio-political disagreements, in the other case the identity crisis, in the presence of which one type of identity seeks to neutralize other types of identity.
  Despite the fact that Professor Leiphart does not consider the use of consociation in homosexual societies and states in his works, he does not deny it and raises several issues at the research level that are directly related to the problem under study.
  Leiphart, in particular, speaks of two important, interrelated concepts, noting that one of the pillars of conservative democracy is the building of a harmonious society.
  This approach is also available in G. Almond, S. In Verba studies, they note that regardless of the structure of society, everyone has a problem of aggregation.
  Therefore, the right choice of political regime and system of public administration is aimed at organizing and implementing it as effectively as possible. 548 POLITICS's strategic processes [2, pp. 634-684].
  It turns out that all societies, regardless of their heterogeneous and homogeneous structure, have an agenda of consolidating interests and forming a harmonious society on a mutually beneficial basis.
  It is another thing that in one case the segmentation of the society is conditioned by division (torn, torn, cleft societies) (where there are ethnic, religious, cultural, linguistic and other heterogeneous segments, and in the other case it can be manifested in the form of social stratification or classes , where societal issues are not strongly divisive, but need effective public administration approaches and consolidation of interests.
 Introducing the application of consociationism in homogeneous states with a homogeneous society, we automatically relate to two different scientific-applied concepts (consociative model and consociative approach).
  The consociational model is the model of democracy that was formed on the basis of the relevant theory and had examples of methodical application in countries such as the Netherlands, Austria, Switzerland, India, etc.
 By consociational approach we mean the selection of ideological perspectives on consociationism and their correct localization, which will lead to the possibility of applying the consociational approach in homogeneous societies [3, pp. 327-352].
  Therefore, if we talk about the application of a conservative approach in homogeneous societies, we must clarify the following questions. Terminological problems of the structure of modern society (transition from segment to start).
  The fact that the society of a homogeneous state (for example, the Republic of Armenia) is homosexual does not mean that there is widespread harmony within that society.
  In general, there are problems in all societies, but they can be big or small, easy to solve or difficult to solve.
 At the same time, there are many biased approaches to the identification and settlement of these issues by the elites, 549 POLITICAL SCIENCE, which are often conditioned by narrow government interests.
  Of course, there are no manifestations of divisiveness in homogeneous societies, but if we accept that all societies have stratification, classes, social structures and different strata due to it, then we automatically accept the existence of layers of society with different gain approaches that need to create a harmonious society. consolidation and modernization of interests [4, pp. 65-97].
  Apparently, this is the essence of consociationism, distributing power within the political system to involve all competing members of society in the process of public administration and decision-making.
  Therefore, at least he erroneously claims that only heterogeneous sectarian societies are explosive from the point of view of conflict and state interests.
 There are also problems based on such conflicting interests in homogeneous societies, but they are different in volume and content [5, pp. 201-217].
  However, to say that there are no conflicts of interest within a homogeneous society and all the strata act in harmony would be at least unfounded.
  Otherwise, the question arises, for example, in the case of Armenia, why did revolutionary political processes take place in 2018 and what were the preconditions for its socio-political dissatisfaction?
  We think that they come as a result of not evaluating and analyzing the important problems of the stratification of the society and the mechanisms of interaction of different social groups in time.
  Studying the socio-political picture of the RA society, we can separate different layers, which have been participating or influencing the socio-political processes for years.
  In general, there are different approaches to stratification, generalizing them, we should note that stratum in Armenian corresponds to the social layer and is defined as an element of the structure of society, which is organized in a hierarchy and is integrated on the basis of multidimensional classification [6, c. 550 POLITICAL SCIENCE 234-238].
  Stratification of society includes many features, and in terms of classification is used for sociological diagnosis of society and to clarify the layers of a certain status (depending on what is perceived in the system of differences).
 At the same time, the strata have a situational nature. they can be created and disappear.
  Mobility in the strata does not mean that the strata (layer) has disappeared, just that some of them can become revolutionaries from counter-revolutionaries or vice versa, from rich to poor, from football fans to chess fans and so on.
  The stratification classification is based on many factors, such as profession, occupation, education, culture, degree of politicization, ethnicity, religion, and so on.
  In the case of the Republic of Armenia, the general picture of the stratification of the society is as follows.
 There are humanitarian, inter-humanitarian, technical, natural and other strata on a professional basis.
  On the basis of employment, we can distinguish three main strata: 1. representatives of private-business circles, 2. employees or servants in the state apparatus, and 3. strata by position and subordination, which include: manager, administrative, technical, service / support and other strata. .
  On the basis of education, there are those who provide education, those who receive education, bachelor students, masters, post-graduate students, trainees, etc.
 On a cultural basis, there are representatives of Soviet culture, bearers of democratic values, bearers of national / patriarchal values, bearers of modern culture, winemakers, carpet weavers, poets, painters.
  Revolutionaries, counter-revolutionaries, political movements fed by foreign grants, public-political organizations, authorities, opposition, etc. are distinguished by the degree of politicization.
  According to social origin, we can distinguish between rich, poor, old, young, peasant, citizen, etc.
  E551 POLITICS We do not seem to have any strata based on the Armenian authorities, as the Armenian authorities have not always exerted various pressures and repressive steps against ethnic groups living in Armenia (Yezidis, Assyrians, Russians, Georgians, Jews, etc.), and the latter in harmony in the socio-political life of Armenia. They have no complaints.
  And finally, one of the important strata in our reality are the layers and sub-layers based on religion.
  According to that, the following can be distinguished: followers of the Armenian Apostolic Church, followers of the Catholic Church (Franks), Muslims, Orthodox, Jews, Agnostics, Atheists and Sectarians (Jehovah's Witnesses, Word of Life, Pentecostals, etc.).
 The problems of applying the consociational approach also refer to the last of the four basic principles of the theory of consociational democracy: the creation of a federation or the granting of autonomy to segments [7, pp. 38-40].
  This principle also needs to be reconsidered in terms of a consociational approach and localization in case of application of the Republic of Armenia.
  In particular, in terms of the stratification of the Armenian society, it is planned to replace the granting of autonomy to the segments with the granting of autonomy to the strata, and in the initial stage of creating a federal state, it will be important to introduce the decentralized homogeneity approach.
  In terms of public administration, there are two types of homogeneity: centrifugal and decentralized.
  Therefore, we can adopt a decentralized unitary governance model and ensure effective local self-government (local self-government).
  If in the case of local self-government the population of the community has the right to resolve issues of local significance independently, to use and manage the community property.
  Self-government is exercised through elected bodies, the community council (representative body) and the head (executive body, mayor in the city, village head in the village). Why not improve the political participation of the latter and develop the local government institutions on the ideological basis of conso 552 POLITICS?
  Apparently, giving autonomy to the strata does not mean autonomy or a higher degree of self-determination (right), but the above-mentioned independence is aimed at promoting the distribution of power between different competing strata in the public administration system, which are actively involved in socio-political processes and decisions. have an impact on the process [9].
  In other words, the goal of the consociational approach is very clear - to involve everyone in the national political processes through the participation of strata, where by participating in the decision-making process, in case of a positive or negative result, not one but all will be responsible.
 The consociative approach, while preserving the essence of the theory of consociational democracy, envisages applying consociativism through localization in homogeneous societies of a state with a homogeneous territorial organization.
  Referring to the governance of a decentralized homogeneous state, we can say that it will not only increase the efficiency of local self-government mechanisms, but also contribute to a smooth transition from homogeneity to federation or confederation [10, pp. 29-32].
  In the case of the Republic of Armenia, this is especially important in terms of the settlement of the Artsakh issue.
  And if we are talking about United Armenia, then its international legal regulations should first of all be sought in the format of Confederate Armenia.
 In the context of the consociational approach, the next important issue refers to the modernization of the main directions and priorities of the RA foreign policy in the short and long term stages.
  In particular, in case of successful localization and effective application of the consociative approach, it is envisaged to turn consociationism into an Armenian brand of democracy.
  In terms of foreign policy, parliamentary diplomacy, the conservative principles of building bilateral relations and other directions and priorities arising from the state interests of the Republic of Armenia should be modernized in the conditions of 553 POLITICS of parliamentary government.
 .
