The purpose of the article is to clarify the importance of the League of Arab States in the process of peaceful settlement of inter-Arab conflicts.
  The activity of the League is studied mainly in the modern period, summarizing the direct period of the League activity.
 "The creation of the League of Arab States became the most important event of the Arab unity movement."
 Initially, the leaders of the Arab states sought to create a weak organization that could be ignored at any time.
  However, further historical developments showed the need for a powerful international organization.
 The Arab League has recently entered a new era of change2.
 It was established in 1945.
  The last country to join the organization was Comoros in 1993.
  The league is based in Cairo and the current Secretary General is Ahmed Abul Gheit of Egypt, which in itself proves the high role of Egypt in the organization, despite the 1979-89 The fact that he was expelled from the league.
 At the time of its establishment, the three main directions of the foreign policy of the Arab League were the struggle for the independence and unity of the Arab countries, as well as the Palestinian issue3.
 414 HISTORY 1950 Syria, Lebanon, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Yemen signed the Joint Defense Agreement, the Joint Defense and Economic Cooperation Agreement, on June 17, 2006.
  The latter was not unanimously approved by all the member states of the League (Iraq and the Underworld did not join it) 5.
 The Arab League found the edges of cooperation between Arab countries in various fields.
  Thus, in 1953. The Arab Telecommunication Union was established in 1954, the Arab Postal Union in 1954, and the Arab Development Bank in 1959, later renamed the Arab Financial Organization.
 1964-65 At the conferences in the Arab League, the establishment of a joint Arab military command was even initiated.
  Later, the Arab League was able to win in 1964. Establishment of the Palestine Liberation Organization in May (at the Arab League summit in Cairo).
  It was also able to reach a peaceful settlement in a number of inter-conflict conflicts in 1963. Invasion of Algeria by Morocco and 1961 In the Iraq-Kuwait conflict.
  During the latter, Arab peacekeeping forces were even sent to Kuwait6.
 When in 1975 The second civil war started in Lebanon, the Arab League only expressed its concern over the registered incidents.
  In order to resolve the Lebanese crisis in Riyadh, the leaders of the League member states agreed and in 1975. The first special session was convened in Cairo in April.
  Contradiction between member countries Sh. Karamanukyan Sh. L., The Role of the League of Arab States in the Anti-Imperialist Struggle of the Arab Countries, Yerevan, 1988, p. 85 Farah Dakhlallah, op. work pp. 393-412, 415 HISTORY were obvious and, although it was possible to temporarily cease hostilities, the League did not provide any radical solution to the crisis7.
  It called on all parties to show "common sense and restraint" only in 1976. in June, when the situation in the country had already become extremely tense.
 The League of Arab States has taken a very cold stance on almost all the civil wars in the region, which gives some authors reason to believe that there is an internal agreement between the member states not to interfere in the internal affairs8.
 Throughout the 1980s, Arab League summits were ineffective due to conflicts between members.
  1980 A meeting of Arab leaders took place in Amman in November 2006.
  The issue on the agenda of the meeting was the elaboration of a pan-Arab position in the Iran-Iraq war.
  However, the countries did not adopt a common position.
  Only in 1988. At a special summit in Algeria on January 7, 1945, all Arab countries came out in support of peace and condemned Iran for continuing hostilities10.
 The Iran-Iraq war showed the deepening of the contradictions and the activation of centrifugal forces in the Arab world in the early 80s.
  That war also pushed Saudi Arabia in 1981. to form a new group, the Cooperation Council of the Arab States of the Persian Gulf11.
 1990-91 No common position was formed in the Arab League during the Gulf War either.
  1990 May and August GuKaramanukyan Sh. L. note work page 165 Ibid. Farah Dakhlallah, note work pp. 393-412, Rydenko LN, Solovyeva ZA, ref. work., с. 34 416 HISTORY Extinguished League summits failed to resolve the oil issue between Iraq and Kuwait.
  This led to the "internationalization" of Gulf security.
 Gulf 1990-91 In the war, the Arab League: 1. failed to resolve the Iraq-Kuwait conflict, which led to the Iraqi aggression; 2. failed to reach a peace agreement even after the aggression, which led to foreign intervention;
 Later, the former representative of the Arab League to the UN, Clovis Maxud, stated that the League did not have the authority to take preventive measures on its own, so it had to act only through the summit.
  However, as a result of the disagreements of the member states, the League was not able to fully intervene through the summit as well12.
 External intervention in Gulf security issues set a dangerous precedent for the future.
  Some authors raised the issue of the effectiveness of the existence of the Arab League13.
  Interestingly, in contrast to the Gulf Cooperation Council, whose members unanimously condemned Iraq, six of the 21 members of the League of Arab States directly supported Iraq (Jordan, Mauritania, Sudan, Yemen, the KGB and, of course, Iraq) 14.
 In the decade since the collapse of the Soviet Union and the establishment of a unipolar system, the Arab League has failed in its initiatives and has been unable to intervene in any conflicts, particularly Farah Dakhlallah. work pp. 393-412, Rydenko LN, Solovyeva ZA, ref. work., с. 92 2 HISTORY like 2000 The second intifada broke out in Palestine.
  In the 90s, only two summits were held in the League in 1990. and 1996 15.
  As the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Qatar Sheikh Hammad bin Yassem states: "Our meetings were of a ceremonial nature and we did not have a clear purpose."
 The situation changed in 2002 when Amr Moussa, a well-known Egyptian politician, was appointed Secretary General of the League.
 Then, at the summit in Beirut, the Saudi side put forward the Arab Peace Initiative.
 It offered to establish relations with Israel in 1967. on the condition of returning to the borders17.
 Then the League summits were held in Sharm El Sheikh in 2003, in Tunisia in 2004, in Algeria in 2005, in Khartoum in 2006, in Riyadh in 2007, in Damascus in 2008, in Doha in 2009. etc.
  Attempts were made to establish an Arab Peace and Security Council (Rapid Reaction Force, etc.), following the example of the African Union.
 2003 The war showed the problems in the Arab League and the need for change.
  Throughout the Iraqi crisis, the Arab League mainly tried to persuade the Iraqi side to cooperate with the UN and accept the resolutions put forward by the latter.
  During the pre-war period, the Arab League organized special meetings, and the representatives of the latter member states paid numerous visits to Iraq.
  Attempts were made to adopt a common position in the event of a possible American attack if such developments did not succeed.
  However, disagreements within the League did not allow a common denominator.
  Egyptian Farah Dakhlallah, political scientist of the University of Helwan, ref. work., pp. 393-412, ibid. 418 HISTORY Sayed Eliwa, a professor of science, states: "Many Arabs are disappointed because the resolutions and decisions made in the League are never implemented."
 Until 2003 When the war broke out, the Arab League took the last step to prevent it.
  A delegation consisting of the Foreign Ministers of Egypt, Syria, Bahrain, Lebanon and Tunisia and the Secretary General of the League Amr Moussa was to arrive in Baghdad.
  However, the Iraqi leadership first asked to postpone the visit, then also canceled it.
  The Arab League expressed "deep regret" over Iraq's decision.
  Such behavior of the Iraqi leadership showed that in times of crisis, Arab countries do not consider the option of seeking help from the Arab League.
 After the war, the Arab League did not develop any humanitarian aid projects to rebuild Iraq's economy.
  No member of the Arab League dared to speak about the future of Iraq's democratic system.
 2003 In the aftermath of the Iraq war, the Arab League took some symbolic action.
  2006 Mokhtar Lamani was sent to Iraq as a permanent representative of the Arab League in Iraq.
  However, already in 2007 In the beginning, Laman resigned from his post19.
 2003 In an interview with a British media outlet on April 1, the League Secretary General Amr Moussa stated that the Iraq war would not have happened if all the Arab states had taken a common position on the issue.
  He declared that the war had given rise to so much controversy in the Arab world that he personally began to doubt the bright future of the Arab League.
  Amr Farah Dakhlallah, ref. work., pp. 393-412, Marco Pinfari, op. work 419 HISTORY Musa also mentioned that the Arab countries wanted a war, but the Arab people did not.
 According to Agence France Presse, in 2003 A conference was held in Cairo on June 15, 1516, with the aim of initiating the reform of the Arab League.
  As a result of a six-month study, the commission was to propose a draft reform of the League, based mainly on proposals from Egypt, Syria and Saudi Arabia.
  The European Union should have served as an example for the transformation of the Arab League.
 2004 At a meeting of Arab leaders in Algeria in March 1945, it was decided to establish an "interim interim parliament."
  The headquarters would be in Damascus.
  Its deputies (4 representatives from each country) had to prepare the ground for the creation of a pan-Arab representative body, following the example of the European Parliament.
  The authors of the draft hoped to thus increase the role of the League of Arab States in international relations21.
 2008 At an Arab conference in Damascus in March 2007, League Secretary-General Amr Moussa declared that there was "an unacceptable mess" in inter-Arab relations22.
 The Arab League has also tried to be active in a number of other inter-Arab conflicts.
  It tried to intervene and settle the situation in the civil war that broke out in Yemen between government forces and the rebel 420 HISTORY armed religious group Hutis.
  League Secretary General Amr Moussa visited Yemen in 2009. In March, he met with President Ali Abdullah Saleh.
  Musa offered the League assistance in establishing peace and stability in Yemen.
  However, the Yemeni president refused, saying that he did not want to internationalize the situation.
  Later, however, Yemen accepted the mediation of an international organization, but not the Arab League, but the Gulf Cooperation Council23.
  The League could not intervene in the conflict on its own without the request of the conflicting parties.
  And the conflicting parties did not trust the League.
 Then the League in 2009. In November, he tried to intervene in the tense situation that arose after the match between the Egyptian and Algerian football teams in Sudan.
  The clash between the fans of the national teams of the two countries contributed to the tension of the situation.
  Diplomatic relations between Egypt and Algeria were strained.
  The league's attempts failed, with both sides rejecting the offer of mediation24.
 The Arab League also failed to influence the crisis situation in Western Sahara, as the conflicting parties decided to apply only to the UN25.
 2006 During the Lebanese crisis, the Arab League demanded the end of the occupation of Lebanon.
  It also demanded that international courts investigate and prosecute those responsible for the killings in Lebanon, including those responsible for the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri.
 The League also did a great deal of work in Somalia to end the civil war.
  In order to establish peace, League officials even had to negotiate with extremists at the 421 HISTORY Fury.
 In Mauritania in 2008 In the aftermath of the coup (military coup), the Arab League played a key role in the peace process, as the rights of the African Union were limited to negotiating with regimes that came to power in a military coup.
  Nevertheless, the two international organizations, as a result of close cooperation, were able to register some success26.
 Despite the great responsibility placed on him, the Arab League could not justify itself.
  It began to be widely criticized after 2003. The African Union Peace and Security Council, established in December 2006, authorized the African Union to intervene in the conflicts of its member states if they threatened the population of the states and were of a highly inhumane nature.
  The League of Arab States, by contrast, was largely a decision-making body with no influential mechanisms27.
 The Arab League also failed to unite the member states economically28.
  Nevertheless, such attempts were made.
 1965 The Arab Single Market was created, which is open to all member countries of the League.
  The latter includes exemption from customs duties in the case of natural resources, agricultural products, as well as free movement of capital and labor in member countries29.
 Hesham Youssef, op. work In the same place, p. 81 422 HISTORY According to some authors, the Arab League is a dull or even failed example of an international organization30.
  However, the advantage of the Arab League in the conflict settlement process is that it does not represent the interests of any particular group.
 It is not fighting for the benefit of Hamas or Fatah, but for the Palestinian people.
  It does not fight for the benefit of Sunni Muslims and against Shia Muslims.
  The League of Arab States fights for the individual and common interests of its member states.
 Having traveled a long way, the Arab League has had both victories and defeats.
  It is still trying to resolve the divisions that divide the Arab world and is, in fact, the only international pan-Arab organization that still operates.
  However, the Arab League did not develop into a structure that sowed deeper cooperation, such as the EU31.
  The ruling regimes in the Arab world were practically afraid of the Arab League, as it could severely limit their power32.
 However, the Arab League, despite its ineffectiveness, has only benefited Arab unity.
  Contrary to expectations, the League, of course, failed to become a supranational entity uniting the Arab world.
  However, it definitely tried and still tries to unite Charuben Karapetyan, Syria's place and role in the Arab-Israeli conflict / 1946-2000 /, Cairo, 2008, 352 pages, page 92 Hesham Youssef, Ref. work https:
 //ifsh.de/file423 HISTORY Arab countries with very different goals and views.
  The Arab people expect unity from the league, but not the Arab regimes.
 .
