The market of higher professional education has now become very competitive.
  On the one hand, there is an overload of domestic and international institutions providing professional educational services in the market, on the other hand, the requirements of the employer for the qualitative characteristics of the graduate are constantly changing, connected with the sharp socio-economic progress of the society.
  And the problem is not only that the universities will not be able to follow the qualitative results of their activities in the path of changing developments in the labor market, but also to review the conceptual approaches to quality assurance of educational services and show new approaches to quality results management.
 The competitive environment of the labor market is reviewing the priority approaches to quality assessment of graduates with higher education.
  And if not so long ago the humanitarian nature of education, the priority of universal values, human life and health, the free and comprehensive development of the individual, the upbringing of civic consciousness, national dignity, patriotism, legitimacy and environmental worldview [1], then the quality of a university graduate are targeted at the needs of the employer and the labor market.
  In this regard, the university system currently faces the problems of effective management functions of professional educational programs, which require their urgent solutions.
 When is IDP considered competitive? The key issue of education quality management policy in the higher education system is to clarify the goals of the vocational education program.
  Currently, different universities set different goals.
  If private universities, which are also for-profit organizations, strive to increase the number of applicants, and generally do not pursue high quality assurance requirements.
  State universities, which receive funding from the state budget, are more interested in the quality of graduates, as their activities serve the public interest.
  However, in all cases, the qualitative characteristics of the graduate play a decisive role for the sustainable development of universities, as the most important competitive component of the educational market is the quality of education.
 This begs the question of how the quality of a university graduate will be measured.
  Studies show that they are diverse, and researchers do not have a common approach to measuring the quality of educational services.
  In general, experts agree that the level of satisfaction of the expectations of internal and external educational stakeholders, which characterizes the quality of educational services [2].
  And in our opinion, the quality of education can be measured in 60 MANAGEMENT with only one general indicator, which is the speed of employment in the profession of a graduate.
 Indeed, if a university is producing a competitive graduate in the labor market, the latter should be in demand among employers and find a job in its specialty as soon as possible, which has different manifestations in different countries (see Figure 1).
 Figure 1. Duration of graduation (months) [3] Norway Austria Average EBRD Portugal Greece Armenia Macedonia Figure 2.
  Unemployment rate of university graduates one year after graduation (%) [4] In the Republic of Armenia there is no systematic registration of employment of university graduates in their profession 61, but our country has a high unemployment rate of professionals educated in the European Higher Education Area (EHEA) (see chart). 2).
  Therefore, in our opinion, the key goal of the competitiveness management of professional programs implemented in the university should be considered the speed of employment of the graduate in his / her profession (see Figure 2).
  And the objects of management will be the final results of learning, which ultimately meet the quality requirements of the labor market for the graduate.
 MCT-Management Objective Graduate Employment Speed ​​Job Requirements for Graduates Outcomes for Vocational Learning Outcomes Learning Outcomes for Curriculum Figure 3 Competitive Outcome Management Roadmap 5 Developed by the authors.
 GOVERNANCE Naturally, universities strive for high employment rates for graduates, trying to have a direct impact on that process.
  This is especially true for those universities that have established alumni unions and the latter are supported by employers in finding employment for university graduates.
 A similar tendency is observed at the French University in Armenia.
  And relatively small educational institutions, which have a small number of graduates, themselves directly contact employers and make joint efforts to find graduates, such as the International Accounting Training Center.
  In both cases, in fact, they are directly interfering in the labor market.
  However, we believe that the transfer of graduates is considered more effective when the normal law of market supply and demand is in force and the qualitative characteristics of the graduates are always in a competitive position in the labor market.
  And for that, there is a need to effectively manage the formation of the expected results from the MCS in the universities.
 What are the key stages of managing the results of the ICT? It is important to determine the goals of the management of the ICT, which, in our opinion, should take place in three dimensions. in the curriculum, the learning outcomes outlined in the ICS, and within the labor market demand (Figure 4).
  Therefore, in the management system, a hierarchy of goals is formed on a "bottom-up" basis, where subject programs are considered as management objects that contribute to the formation of learning outcomes through ICT.
  It turns out that the main task of management in this phase is to harmonize the "subject curriculum - overall educational outcomes" chain so that not only knowledge but also skills are formed in the student while studying the subject and the end of the study intended by the MCS.
 Learning Outcomes in Subject Programs Teaching Thematic Material Targeted and Learning the Tasks Outcomes of Vocational Education Programs: Labor Market Expectations The next stage of the management of "Armenpress" is the coordination of the student 's professional abilities and their coordination with the subject programs so that all of them are directed to the demand of the labor market.
  Here, the benchmarking and comparative analysis of the final results envisaged by the ICS with the best experience in the educational market is important.
  At this stage of governance, the resource constraints of the implementation of the ICR are also identified and decisions are made on the possibilities of attracting additional resources that contribute to the formation of competitive outcomes.
 In the next stage of ICR management, the object of study is the quality of the final results.
  In the post-industrial era, the employer's requirements for graduate skills are changing rapidly.
  In this regard, the management faces problems in making management decisions that will contribute to the qualitative progress of the ICS outcomes from the needs of the education market.
  Still undergraduate Compiled by the authors.
 64 GOVERNANCE A freshman student now needs to provide skills and abilities that may not be "obsolete" for a graduate in four years and will not become competitive in the education market.
  Therefore, the most important stage of ICT management is the creation of an effective management toolkit that combines the professional skills of the NQF graduate with the dynamically changing expectations of the employer in the labor market.
 The managerial approach of "filling a barrel with buckets" The graduate's professional skills are not given to him from above, but are formed gradually during his studies during the university years.
  In this regard, we propose to present the anatomy of ICR management in terms of "filling barrels and buckets".
  The barrel, which will be conventionally considered to be a combination of graduates' competitive abilities, is gradually filled with buckets during the university years, each of which is presented as a specific professional A, B, C, D ability (see Figure 3).
  And each bucket, in its turn, is "filled" with professional knowledge, skills and abilities arising from the subject programs.
  And if the ICS management system is constructed in such a way that the interconnected chain of "filling the buckets" and the resulting "full filling of the barrel" during the graduate's studies is monitored, then the process of forming competitive outcomes becomes manageable.
 Table 1 Graduate Professional Development Matrix Subjects Teaching Outcomes UA 1 UA 2 UA 3 UA 4 65 MANAGEMENT Assume that the employer for a specific "Z" specialty requires A, B, C, D competencies, which are used to ensure competitiveness in the university. r, p, m, n subject programs, which contribute to the "filling of buckets" with appropriate capabilities.
  Thus, the process of "filling the barrel of professional skills with buckets" is presented in the form of a matrix (see Table 1), which clearly outlines which subject is taught, to what extent it contributes to the formation of the graduate's abilities during the university years.
  This hierarchical mechanism provides an opportunity to assess the effectiveness of ICT management in universities.
 How to ensure the effectiveness of the management of the ICT The effectiveness of the management of the vocational education program largely depends on the monitoring of the process of achieving the set goals.
  In this regard, it is important how and with what frequency the actual achievements of the learning outcomes envisaged by the subject programs are evaluated. and to what extent they meet the required range of professional skills of the graduate with their qualitative characteristics.
 To this end, we propose to apply targeted monitoring of deviations in the formation of graduate professional skills through self-assessment and self-analysis in the management system (see Table 2).
  As targets, the final targets (s) for each subject are compared with the actual results (n) formed by subtracting the competitiveness of the competitive outcome (s / g), which is closer to 1.0 than the IQ. The management of this end component is considered effective.
 66 GOVERNANCE Thus, the results of the self-assessment show that the teaching of the subject f in its entirety contributed to the formation of the 4 outcomes of the AI, as the coefficient of achievement of the targets in this target direction is 1.0 digits (see Table 2).
  Conversely, there was a marked shortfall in the formation of AI1 on the subject e, as the monitoring achieved the lowest goal achievement coefficient (0.33).
 Table 2 Graduate Development Skills Factors D / a N Accessibility of Learning Outcomes UA 1 UA 2 UA 3 UA 4 pH / g n p sh / g n p / g N P sh / g Such monitoring results in an opportunity to increase the effectiveness of ICR management , as the actual and targeted skills acquired as a result of learning the subjects are constantly compared, deviations in the formation of skills are revealed, as a result of which managerial decisions are made to adapt the qualitative professionalism of the graduate to the requirements of the employer (see Figure 5).
 .
