Teams are created to achieve certain goals and the quantitative result of their activities is decisive.
 Therefore, the team is considered successful if it has achieved its goal.
 Thus, the main feature of team work efficiency is the level of achieving the team's goals.
  Achieving any goal requires certain activities of team members.
  If the team activity fully or partially leads to the set goals, it is effective.
 Achieving team goals - increasing effectiveness - is achieved when all members recognize those 124 MANAGEMENT goals from a personal, professional, and spiritual perspective.
  This is possible only in case of a high level of maturity of the whole team and each of its members.
 The effectiveness of a team is its ability to achieve the following 4 goals: introduction of innovations (adaptation to change), increase of productivity, provision of high quality products and services, satisfaction of employees' needs [1, p.289].
 By adapting to innovations, we mean that the rapid response of the team to the demands of the external environment and their changes is important for the organization.
  Productivity is the achievement of corporate goals with minimal resources.
  Quality means the absence of defects and the compliance of goods and services with consumer expectations.
  Meeting the needs of employees will enable the team to achieve the loyalty and inspiration of its members.
 Three areas are strongly related to the effectiveness of the team. 1. unity or cohesion; 2. task performance and social-emotional role; 3. personal influence of the leader on the team.
 Unity and team efficiency.
  The unity of the team is the union of its members, their aspiration towards a common goal.
  The members of the united team are not only deeply committed to him, but also feel that they are busy with something significant, as well as they experience joy in achieving common success.
  When there is no unity among people, they are not so worried about the prosperity of the team.
  Unity is a positive characteristic of the team.
 Factors of team unity.
  Leaders can use certain factors to achieve team building.
  One of those factors is the interaction.
  In 125 MANAGEMENT the more communication there is between team members, the more time they spend together, the stronger the team cohesion.
  The second factor is the common goals.
  If the team members agree on the goals of the team, they become united.
  It allows creating a team of like-minded thinkers.
  The third factor is the attractiveness of the team, which means that its members have the same principles and they like to work together.
  In this case, the employees treat each other with sympathy and respect.
  Team context is also influenced by the organizational context.
  When one team competes with another, its unity increases as both participants in the competition strive for victory.
  And finally, the success and the positive assessment of other people strengthens the unity of the team even more.
  When the team successfully completes the task and the other members of the organization acknowledge its success, the team members feel an influx of energy and their loyalty increases.
 Consequences of team unity.
  The consequences of team unity can be divided into two categories: spiritual and material.
  As a rule, the fighting spirit of the team is high in united teams, because it is the unity that improves the communication of the team members, promotes the creation of a friendly atmosphere, maintains constant communication, strengthens loyalty and more active participation of employees in the decision-making process.
  The joint team better meets the needs of its members.
 In terms of productivity, cohesion usually has a positive effect on it, although the results of research are ambiguous.
 Employees in joint teams are highly motivated, so they make every effort to succeed.
  However, the effect of social stimulation can occur here, when the presence of someone inspires the team members.
  Research has shown that unity has a significant impact on job performance if the interdependence of the team is high, ie when team members need to work closely together and coordinate their work.
 Another important factor influencing productivity is the relationship between the team and top managers.
  In one study, the correlation between work results and unity was assessed using a sample of 200 teams.
  It has been found that consolidated teams are more productive when team members feel supported by top management, and less productive when top managers are hostile.
  The support of the leaders helped the teams to achieve higher norms, and the hostility of the leaders caused the norms to decrease.
 The task and social-psychological needs.
 For a team to be effective, it is necessary to strike a balance between fulfilling corporate tasks and meeting the social-emotional needs of employees.
  Here it is appropriate to remember the leadership styles, focused on the task or people.
  Focusing on the task is mainly related to high productivity, and focusing on people is related to relationships and meeting the needs of employees.
  In order for a team to show good long-term results, it must not only fulfill the tasks set before it, but also meet the needs of the people included in it.
  These conditions are met by the participation of a leader who plays one of two main roles: either the role of a specialist or a social-psychological role [1, p.293].
 The role of the specialist is connected with the means of solving new ideas and problems, as well as evaluating the effectiveness of the team.
  The facilitator examines the facts, makes suggestions, finds the information needed to simplify the task, summarizes the data, and inspires employees.
  The social-emotional role includes behaviors such as involving team members in problem-solving, accepting other ideas, resolving disagreements and conflicts, and being attentive to employees' feelings and needs.
  The one who plays this role sets an example for others.
  He sets the norms of behavior and creates cooperation and collaboration between team members, helping them to overcome difficulties.
 Ideally, the team leader plays these two roles at the same time, which is respected and admired.
  However, sometimes it is necessary to focus on a role, for example, if the team members are quite focused on the task, the leader can play a mainly social-emotional role.
  Conversely, when team members are focused on the relationship, the leader should play the role of a specialist, explaining the task and setting goals.
  The leader's efforts are aimed at providing conditions in which team members will be able to meet these two types of needs.
  Well-balanced teams are able to work successfully in the long run if each employee meets his or her basic needs and accomplishes the tasks assigned to him or her.
 The personal role of the leader.
  Much of a team's success depends on its leader's effectiveness and professionalism.
 Researchers at Harvard Business School, examining the team of cardiologists, noted that the leader's actions are the most important factor in the effectiveness of the whole team.
  Many people are able to acquire the skills necessary for a team leader, although acquiring those skills is not always easy.
  In order to become an effective leader, one must strive to change, to strive to go beyond one's own comfort.
 Here are three ways to become a true team leader.
  They are: to accept the meaning of common goals and values, to be able to admit one's own mistakes and to be the opponent of the team members and to support them.
 It should be noted that teamwork does not mean an increase in efficiency.
  The result of numerous researches in 128 GOVERNANCE stands out a number of characteristics that exist in effective teams.
  These are clear goals.
  High-productivity teams are characterized by a clear understanding of their purpose and the belief that it will lead to useful or important results.
 Necessary skills and abilities.
  Effective teams are made up of knowledgeable, highly qualified professionals who possess unique skills and abilities.
 Mutual trust.
  Effective teams are characterized by a high level of trust.
  The members of such teams believe in the honesty and abilities of their colleagues.
 General inclination.
  This is characterized by the great dedication of the team members to its goals and the willingness of people to spend a lot of energy to achieve them.
 Closely related.
  Effective teams are characterized by a high level of communication.
  The members of such teams are able to convey information to each other in a simple and understandable way.
 Ability to negotiate.
  Effective teams are constantly striving to increase flexibility and incorporate all possible corrections and changes in the work tasks of their members.
  Such flexibility requires team members to have a good ability to come to terms with each other.
 Effective management.
  An effective leader can force the team to follow him, overcoming the most difficult obstacles.
  How.
  He clearly explains the task and sets clear goals.
 Internal and external support.
  The last characteristic of effective teams is the supportive atmosphere.
  If we talk about the internal situation, a strong infrastructure must be formed in these teams.
  And if we talk about external support, then there are 129 MANAGEMENT The management staff must provide the team with all the resources it needs to carry out the work assigned to it [2, p.726].
 Thus, the study of the effectiveness of teamwork should start with the study of the factors influencing it.
  By observing and finding out the impact of each factor, it is possible to influence that factor in order to increase the efficiency of the organization.
 The role of Khotoronian testing in increasing the work capacity of employees.
  One of the most popular tests performed to increase the ability of employees to work is the Khotoronian test.
  It was carried out in November 1994 when a team of researchers began testing at the Khotoron plant in Western Electric, Chichero, Illinois.
  Its original purpose was to determine the relationship between physical conditions of work and labor productivity.
  This experiment was the logical development of the theory of "scientific management", which was prevalent at that time.
  As is often the case with great discoveries, the results that scientists expected were not achieved.
 Unexpectedly, they noticed something more important, which indirectly led to the emergence of the theory of "human relations" in management.
 It should be noted that the above test was performed in four stages.
 The essence of the first phase of the experiment was to find out the effect of lighting on the productivity of employees.
  At this stage, the employees were divided into two groups: control and experimental.
  To the researchers' surprise, when they increased the illumination in the experimental group, the productivity of both groups increased.
  The same thing happened when the lighting was reduced.
  The researchers concluded that in 130 GOVERNMENT, lighting had a negligible effect on labor productivity.
  They realized that the experiment failed because of factors beyond their control.
  It turned out that their version was correct, but for completely different reasons.
 Elton Mayo, who was already one of the best scientists at Harvard University at the time, joined the group in the second round.
 At this stage, a laboratory test of relay collectors was performed.
  This time a small group of six volunteers was separated from the rest of the staff and received a reduced salary for their work.
  Workers were given more freedom of communication than was customary in the factory.
  As a result, a closer relationship developed between them.
  Initially, the results substantiated the initial hypothesis.
  When, for example, additional breaks in work were introduced, labor productivity increased.
 Scientists explained this by the lower degree of fatigue.
  That is why the group continued to make similar changes in working conditions, reducing the working day and the working week.
  And labor productivity continued to grow.
  When scientists restored the original working conditions, labor productivity remained at the previous high level.
  According to the management theory of that time, such a thing should not have happened, but it did.
  That is why a survey was conducted among the participants to find out the reasons for this phenomenon.
  Scientists later discovered that a human element had a greater effect on work efficiency than a change in technical and physical conditions.
 The third phase of the experiments was originally conceived as a simple plan to improve direct human control.
  As a result, however, the plan was outsourced to a large program of more than 20,000 employees with 131 MANAGEMENTs.
  A large amount of information was collected on the attitude of employees towards their work.
  As a result, the researchers found that the productivity and status of each employee in the organization depended on both the employee and the staff.
 To study the impact of colleagues on employee productivity, scientists decided to conduct a fourth experiment.
  The fourth phase was supposed to reveal the impact of financial incentive programs based on team performance.
  The scientists logically based on the hypothesis that employees who worked faster than others and were motivated by the desire to earn more, will force more slowness to increase output.
 But this time, too, a surprise awaited the scientists.
  In fact, more agile employees tended to slow down so as not to fall outside the scope of the team.
  They did not want to be seen as violating the accepted rhythm or seeing themselves as a threat to the well-being of other team members.
  However, those who worked slower than others still tried to increase their productivity.
 Conclusions of the Khotoronian test.
  The Khotoronian experiment yielded so much data that it enabled many scientific discoveries to be made.
 The main discoveries were the importance of behavioral factors, relationships with leaders, and what is now called the Khotoronian effect.
  The devastating effect is the conditions under which innovation, interest in experimentation, or increased attention to the issue leads to a distorted, particularly favorable, result.
  The test subjects really worked harder due to the fact that they only realized that they were participating in the experiment.
  And now in the 132 GOVERNMENT scientists who study behavioral factors are well aware of the Khotoronian effect and make plans to avoid it.
  However, there are more cases when after the end of the experiment the scientists notice the presence of the Khotornian effect.
 It is obvious that the Khotoronian effect affected the results of the work, but it was only one of the factors.
  According to scientists, another important factor influencing the increase of work efficiency is the form of control.
  During the experiment, managers often had less control over employees than usual.
 .
