Corruption has accompanied humanity since time immemorial and continues to be the focus of the state and society as the greatest evil pursuing society.
  In order to solve this problem, it is essential to identify the causes of corruption, so that by identifying the latter, the criminal elements that cause corrupt behavior can be neutralized as much as possible.
  The latter is the field of study of criminology.
  It should be noted here that the economic, social, political, legislative factors contributing to corruption have been studied in depth, but the criminogenic factors seem to have been pushed into the background, they have not been given an important role in the fight against corruption.
  Various legal mechanisms have been developed, economic reforms have been implemented, etc., which is also important, but the importance of working with the person (consciousness / subconscious) has never been given, in-depth study of the motives of the person's corrupt behavior and correction of the behavior.
 Meanwhile, we believe that revealing the motivational features of corrupt behavior, the psychological, subjective factors of that behavior can contribute to a deeper understanding of the causal complex of corrupt behavior and the effectiveness of preventive measures.
 Thus, based on the above, let's try to reveal some of the criminological and psychological reasons from the point of view of criminology.
  In particular, in the framework of this article we will try to understand what are the signals that teach corrupt behavior on the public consciousness / subconscious, which are presented to the public through works (cartoon, film, computer game, fairy tale, etc.).
 Thus, in the world around us, a number of external signals can sow criminal / corrupt behavior in the public consciousness.
  They are the means of influencing consciousness that program and direct a person's behavior.
  The latter can be realized through films, cartoons, computer games, fairy tales with corresponding criminal elements.
 Means of such influence become more dangerous when they target children.
  Children, being the most vulnerable social group, can easily be exposed to those criminal signals, which will involuntarily dictate their ideas, taking root in the subconscious, subconscious and consciousness.
  For children, these signals often work through cartoons.
  Cartoons 82 JURISDICTIONS are not only a world of fairy tales, imagination or fiction, but much more serious than the latter, they are the cultural archetypes that are based on the earliest childhood in consciousness [1, p. 163].
 According to Albert Bandura's scientific theory of social learning, children consider what they see to be normal, so if a child sees, for example, violence, no one will be able to explain to him that it is bad, he will copy those actions without even feeling any emotion. to his "victim" [2].
  Therefore, cartoons can also instill corrupt or anti-corruption behavior in children.
  In particular, it should be noted that the role of Soviet cartoons in shaping anti-corruption behavior is great.
  For example, Winnie the Pooh, when he tasted too much honey, could not get out of the door, and in the cartoon "Golden Goat" the end of the head of state was not good, because he loved wealth so much that he eventually drowned from his impatience, let's mention the old Armenian cartoons. "Golden Shoe", "Mirror Tale", where there is an episode when the bribe-taker accidentally sees himself in the mirror and so on.
 Such cartoons instill anti-corruption spirit in children, as it is also very important for the child to develop a sense of size and satisfaction in wealth.
  Currently, some cartoons contain the opposite training programs.
  For example, in one part of the "Masha and the Bear" cartoon, Masha goes to the bear who is stronger, gives her candies and flowers, so-called "bribes".
  Maybe there is a different meaning in the cartoon, but for children at the age of watching that cartoon, it will be difficult to understand the real meaning in depth.
  They perceive the most superficial and easily perceived information.
  By the way, this cartoon was recognized as the most harmful filmed story for children.
  Such an unexpected conclusion was expressed by Russian psychologists, compiling a unique rating of domestic and foreign animations.
 83 JURISDICTION We should not separate computer games from cartoons, from which adults are not far either.
  Today's reality is full of virtual games that teach corrupt, criminal behavior.
  Many of them work with the following program: the more the player kills, damages, explodes virtual people (be they in human form or in another virtual image), the more powerful the image of the given person will become, because at the expense of all that he will become stronger.
  A person who plays such games is a great corruptor in the virtual world, because the more he blows up, harms people, the more he gets rich by receiving virtual money or points.
  It is even more cruel when, as a result, the whole computer screen is shown with blood, which is supposed to make the player enjoy it.
  We think this is not only an effective program to form corruption, but also criminal behavior in general.
  As a fact of the latter, let us mention the armed attack on the mosques of Christchurch, New Zealand, on March 15, 2019, when a terrorist killed 49 people and filmed it all with a video camera as in a number of computer games (Counter-Strike, Warface, World war , Medal of honor, etc.).
 In this respect, one can even say that corrupt behavior can be the least evil.
  Such games instill in a person a behavior corresponding to a similar game program and the person can already do it by the method of identification, because, as mentioned, there are signals that are not perceived by the consciousness as such, but in the appropriate situation can affect the person's subconscious. and control the behavior.
  As a result, the person may engage in corrupt or other criminal behavior without realizing that he or she is repeating the same behavior that he or she has learned through computer games.
 Speaking of cartoons, computer games, let's not forget to mention the movies as well.
  We all unequivocally understand the importance of the role of law enforcement agencies in combating crime and providing information on crime in the fight against corruption.
 However, if the society treats people with such behavior negatively, then corruption may increase, because corruption is one of the most difficult crimes to detect, and if there are no such people, a number of corruption crimes will not be detected.
  Besides, the corrupt people will act even more fearlessly, thinking that their criminal activities will not be revealed.
 This importance is also enshrined in Article 33 of the UN Convention against Corruption, which deals with the protection of whistleblowers, according to which each State Party should consider including in its domestic legal system appropriate measures to protect all persons against any unjust treatment. The competent authorities shall be informed in good faith and in good faith of the facts of the offenses which they have found to be in conformity with this Convention. [4]
 Unfortunately, sometimes negative stereotypes are formed in the society about people with information (for example, such people are often called "employers", etc.), in the formation and strengthening of which the films broadcast on television also contribute.
  For example, in the "Yere1" TV series broadcast in Armenia, the character of "Loris" was not perceived as a positive character, as he was considered a person who reported to the police, while, if we remember again from the Soviet films "Gentlemen of Success" ", Then we will understand that the persons who cooperate with the law enforcement bodies and report on the crime are presented here as positive characters, moreover, we can also say" heroes ".
 Such films can have a great impact on the creation and establishment of the institute of people who express information.
  After Ivan the Terrible, the second and last head of state who managed to curb corruption was Joseph Stalin.
 JURISDICTION And the point here was not that he was 'directly shooting' the bribe-takers.
  Corruption has been tackled by a system of special measures that apply to everyone, regardless of social status and connections.
  Relatives of corrupt people who knew about corruption but did nothing to find out were also held accountable.
 Moreover, all those who even listened and kept silent about someone taking bribes or engaging in other illegal activities appeared in court.
  Of course, such information was the most effective means of control.
  The latter were of a mass nature, as in case of having information about the crime, the person was subject to criminal liability while keeping silent.
  Research has shown that the large network of broadcasters has played a significant role in combating corruption in the country.
  The authorities had created a situation in which even the walls had ears and the probability of concealing the crime was almost zero.
 We think it is necessary to carry out the opposite propaganda through the same films, cartoons, games, stories presented to the society, to increase the role of people who provide information in the eyes of the society, and not to present such people as having negative behavior.
 It should also be noted that psychological and criminological studies show that regular observation of another's behavior, especially if it is successful, even at the subconscious level easily forms a desire to repeat what is seen.
  2011-2012 in the Republic of Armenia According to a study by a group of psychologists, more than 130 scenes of violence were shown on television in the evening alone during one series.
  Moreover, people who have shown such behavior have almost always succeeded in those soap operas and avoided responsibility.
  This directly contradicts the requirements of Article 22 of the RA Law on Television and Radio, according to which part 2, erotic TV programs, films of horror and obvious violence, as well as possible health, mental and physical development and upbringing of minors are possible. Negatively broadcast programs, except for subscription broadcasting, may be broadcast from 24:00 to 06:00.
  Moreover, the requirements of Article 22 of the RA Law on Television and Radio refer not only to the violence, horror, but also to the prohibition of the spread of "programs that have a possible negative impact on the mental and physical development of the child and upbringing."
  In this regard, a special danger is the spread of such films, serials, programs on television, which directly or indirectly spread "romanticism of the thieving world."
  In particular, in movies or TV series, the representatives of the criminal world are often presented as successful, brave, friendly, fair, capable of solving any issue, and the representatives of the law enforcement bodies in the image of weak, corrupt, submissive, creeping people.
  As a result, the criminal world becomes an ideal for children to try to imitate, and the resentment towards law enforcement officers deepens [6, p. 72].
 And not only the dislike, but also the TV viewers start not trusting the law enforcement bodies, on the contrary, they trust the people who are able to solve their problems in an illegal, corrupt way.
 In this regard, "When discussing the Sicilian mafia, Diego Gambetta emphasizes the fact of widespread lack of trust in the Italian state.
  The growth of private property transactions took place at a time when "the state did not have the opportunity to manage such transactions.
  The state failed to create a reliable way to resolve disputes and manage the transfer of private property.
  The mafia emerged as a substitute for the state.
  Gambeta uses the word "trust" in two senses.
  First, he points out the lack of legitimacy and legitimacy in the state.
  People do not have confidence "that the state will resolve disputes fairly and effectively" and therefore look for an alternative [7, p. 117].
 In fact, the impact of cartoons, games, movies, and stories presented to the public is far greater than we can imagine.
  Let us present a fact confirming the latter.
 A sociologist at the University of California, San Diego, thinks he has the answers to some of the questions.
  His name is David Phillips.
  He refers to the so-called Werther phenomenon.
  The story of the Werther phenomenon is terrifying and at the same time intriguing.
  More than two centuries ago, the German writer I. Goethe published a romance called "The Sufferings of Young Werther".
  The book, whose hero is Werther, commits suicide, which has a great impact on the reader.
  This romance not only made Goethe famous but also sparked a wave of suicides.
  This phenomenon was so powerful that in a number of countries government agencies banned romance.
  Phillips studied the statistics of suicides in the United States in 1947-1968 and found that each time a romance was published on the front page of a newspaper, in the two months that followed, suicides increased by an average of 58 times.
  Each time, 58 more people were killed who could continue their lives.
  [8, p. 137] People imitate other people and see how they solve the problems they face - by suicide, corruption or other means.
  People are greatly influenced by the stories, movies, cartoons, and other materials presented to the public.
 We also believe that it is extremely important to take into account not only the quality of the videos, cartoons, fairy tales and stories presented to children, but also the importance of the 88 JURISDICTION at what age it should be presented.
  For example, almost all Armenians have read The Great H. Tumanyan's "Liar", where the king in his country informs. Whoever tells a lie so that I can tell it is a lie, I will give him half of my kingdom.
 If it is told to the child at an early age, he may not be ready to understand the essence of the fairy tale.
  At an early age, a child will not understand that telling a lie means ingenuity, but will understand an act for which he is rewarded with a piece of the kingdom, which can again lead to corrupt behavior, as a person with corrupt behavior is prone to lying. is rewarded '.
  Therefore, it should be read to the child at an older age, when he will be able to understand the real meaning of the fairy tale, which in this case is ingenuity.
 Taking into account all this, we think that the state needs the support of the state in the fight against corruption, in particular, we suggest that the state carry out an appropriate anti-corruption expertise, through which the relevant experts will determine the criminal effects of the broadcast films and cartoons and if revealed, the work will not be presented to the public.
  In addition, it is necessary to regularly provide the public with programs full of anti-corruption education, films, cartoons, fairy tales, as is often done in some countries.
  For example, show a video where a driver who abused alcohol bribes a police officer, after which the driver continues to walk and runs over the child of a bribed police officer, who dies on the spot, or the person is taken to the operating room with a heart attack and sees that the doctor will operate on him. , to whom he gave a license to practice medicine in exchange for a bribe in conditions when he did not even have basic medical knowledge, etc.
  In fact, the society should not only hear that corruption is evil, but should see and perceive the negative consequences of corruption in depth.
  And in the current reality, it seems that everyone knows that corruption is a negative phenomenon, but often they do not imagine what and what irreversible consequences it can lead to.
 Of course, such videos, films, cartoons and stories are also educational tools, so they should have one goal - to teach the public law-abiding and anti-corruption behavior.
  For the latter, we also propose to develop a training program aimed at neutralizing the causes of corrupt behavior, as well as sowing anti-corruption resistance for preschool, school-age children, students, as well as government employees and teaching it working not with the person's consciousness but with the subconscious.
  It is necessary to fill this important gap in education in order to form an anti-corruption spirit in the society.
 We believe that such work can have some impact on the effectiveness of the fight against corruption.
 .
