Food security is one of the most important challenges of the 21st century.
  Demographics show that at the beginning of our Common Era, the earth's population was only 300 million.
  During the first millennium that number increased by only 30 million, while during the second millennium the population increased 20 times.
  In 2017, the population exceeded 7.5 billion.
  As the population grows, the problem of food security is becoming more acute.
  According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), about 1 billion people are currently starving.
  18-20 million people die of hunger every year.
  This means that food shortages have become not only a stumbling block to development, but also a serious threat to social and political instability.
  In recent years, emigration from "hungry" countries has increased, which poses a serious demographic threat.
 53 ECONOMICS The issue of food supply is also urgent in Armenia.
  Although the population of the Republic of Armenia increased from 3.9 million in 1988-2017 to 3 million, ie decreased by 13%, the problem has not only not eased, but new challenges have been formed.
  The average population growth has dropped from 80-85 thousand to 18.8 thousand, and as a result of increasing emigration, the population of Armenia is now declining.
 The concept of "food security" came into scientific circulation in the 1970s, when, in contrast to the apparent overproduction of food in developed countries, famine and malnutrition became widespread in "Third World" countries.
  It was already clear that the problem of food shortages was reflected not so much in Maltus' theory of "declining fertility" or the underdevelopment of the agrarian sector of the economy as in the poverty of certain sections of the population, which made it difficult to obtain food at current prices.
  It should be noted that the basic English concept of "Food Security" is translated into two: "food security" and "food security".
  Therefore, it is necessary to separate the concepts of "food security of the society" and "food security of the country".
  According to popular belief, "food security of the society" is the provision of sufficient and safe food to all members of the society, for which not only the products produced in the country, but also the food products are used.
  And the "food security of the country" due to its own resources is the provision of physical and economic access to food for the population in accordance with the health norms, both in ordinary and emergency situations [3, p. The document "National Security Strategy of the Republic of Armenia" approved by the decree of February 7, 2006 states that the RA, attaching importance to the complex of departmental-sectoral reforms, among other important spheres, it aims to "... ensure the country's security, including Increasing the production of agricultural products and foodstuffs, improving the balance of import and export, ensuring international food safety standards, implementing comprehensive territorial programs;
  It follows from the above that food security issues must be resolved at the national level.
 2014-2016 A high level of self-sufficiency has been ensured in the country for potatoes, vegetables, fruits and berries, grapes, small cattle, eggs, above-average level for fodder and large cattle.
  Meanwhile, the level of self-sufficiency of wheat, poultry and pork remains low.
 In 2016, the export of fresh plant products, according to operative data, amounted to 76.7 thousand tons, which is about 65% more than in 2014.
 As can be seen from Table 1, the main problem is related to the main food product - wheat.
  Despite the fact that in 2016, compared to 2014, wheat production increased by 12.2 thousand tons, the level of wheat self-sufficiency in Armenia remains low - 53%.
  According to the data of 2016, there are 446.7 thousand hectares of arable land in Armenia, of which 198.1 thousand hectares are grain sowing areas.
  It should be noted that grain sowing areas have increased in recent years, but this has not solved the issue of self-sufficiency.
  The sown areas of grain crops can be increased due to the uncultivated arable lands, which make up about 100 thousand hectares in Armenia.
  However, they are mainly low-yield lands, only a part of which can be used for agricultural purposes.
  In 2016, the average yield was 30.7 c / ha, that is, even if 20% of unused arable land cultivates 55 ECONOMICS grain, the import will be reduced by about 40-50 thousand tons.
 In our opinion, this way can not completely solve the problem, but can only alleviate it.
 The republic has a high level of self-sufficiency in the field of potatoes.
  In 2016, Armenia's exports exceeded imports, self-sufficiency was 101%.
  In recent years, potatoes have been imported to Armenia only as seeds.
  It is true that Armenia is self-sufficient in potatoes, but it still does not reflect the full potential of Armenia.
  As can be seen from Table 1, Armenia has a large number of potato losses.
  In 2016, the losses amounted to 82.4 thousand tons, which is 13.5% of production in 2016.
 The demand for vegetables is completely met by local production.
  In recent years, self-sufficiency has exceeded 100%.
  Along with increasing the capacity of processing companies, there are real preconditions and opportunities for increasing the production of raw materials.
  The high level of non-seasonal prices remains a problem for vegetable growing, which can be solved due to the growth of greenhouses.
 According to 2016 data, 60.2% of the population of Armenia consumes less than 2100 kcal per day (contrary to the national standard - 2232 kcal / day).
  15% consume bread and potatoes, which make up 70% of the latter's diet.
  Moreover, 86.6% of households aged 0 to 14 years and with three or more children have a daily intake of less than 2100 kcal, and 29.5% mainly eat bread and potatoes (70% of the diet) [5] .
 Self-sufficiency, ECONOMICS ECONOMICS Progress in international trade is an important factor in solving the above-mentioned problems.
  The role of Customs and Tax Legislation is very important.
  Customs duties on imports from the third country of the Customs Union are incomparably high.
  This is a rather serious problem.
 In terms of food products, there are noticeable differences in customs policy between Armenia and the CU member states, the mechanical unification of which is fraught with certain risks.
  They tried to settle all that to some extent.
 When importing goods from third countries, the Republic of Armenia applies the rates set by the Union Common Customs Tariff, except for those products, which are included in Annex 4 of the Treaty on Accession of the Republic of Armenia to the Eurasian Economic Union of May 29, 2014. , for which the rates provided in the appendix are applied within the period defined in the appendix.
  It should be noted that there is also an increase in customs duties on foodstuffs mentioned in the appendix, which has a negative impact on imports and increases dependence on EEU countries [7].
 Armenia also promotes exports from the country.
  In case of export of goods to third (outside the territory of the Customs Union) countries, the Republic of Armenia applies 0% export duty, as the CU leaves the determination of export rates to the national legislation of the member state.
 To solve the above-mentioned problems, we propose: 1. To increase grain self-sufficiency, we propose 2. Comprehensive and consistent intensification of production, 3. Improvement of structural and territorial distribution, which in our opinion should be cultivated instead of wheat and barley in low-water areas.
  Although it will require additional costs, it will solve the problem of strengthening the grain feed.
 ECONOMICS 4. To use the full potential of potato production, we propose: y Radical improvement of seed cultivation, as a result of which the Republic of Armenia may completely refuse to import elite seeds.
 y In order to mitigate potato losses in Armenia, it is necessary to establish warehouses and processing enterprises.
 5. In order to solve the problems of vegetable and fruit procurement, it is necessary to introduce effective mechanisms of public-private partnership.
  It is necessary to sign contracts between producers and suppliers.
 6. Taking into account the high level of development of fruit and vegetable growing in the country, and especially the high reputation of Armenian food in the EEU countries, we propose to create a universal brand of Armenian crops, through which Armenian fruits and vegetables will be exported.
  In that case, a serious expert examination will be required in order to export only products of appropriate quality, which will meet the requirements of Codex Alimentarius and Global GAP.
  This will also allow small producers to export their products.
  Opportunities will also be created for freight companies to operate more efficiently.
 7. We offer to supplement the insufficiency of animal products with the introduction of the scientific system of animal husbandry management, comprehensive and consistent intensification of the branch, increase of the management culture, integration of the agri-food system branches and harmonization of interests. Introducing it to the market, regulating the hygiene of animal behavior, strengthening the fodder base, improving the pedigree business, by radically reviewing the ownership form of natural cages.
 8. In the new economic situation, in the conditions of EEU membership, it is also necessary to try to review the import customs duties, as they increase the dependence of Armenia on the EEU member states.
 9. As can be seen from Table 1, the loss of production is quite large, even for those products whose self-sufficiency is low, so it is necessary to create state-sponsored crop storage, storage and refrigeration facilities.
 .
