In medieval Armenia, noble Armenian women contributed to the construction of buildings of spiritual and educational significance, their generous monetary donations, sponsorship, tax exemption, as well as the development of education and schooling.
 The information preserved in Armenian sources, especially in the lithographic inscriptions, allows to form an idea about the activities of the queens and princesses of Bagratuni Armenia.
  The activities of the Armenian noble class included a very wide range.
  Although we sometimes encounter evidence of their interference in public affairs, their contribution to urban development, particularly church building, as well as to donations to churches and monasteries, is even greater.
 The activities of the queens and princesses of Bagratuni Armenia can be classified into two conditional groups: construction and donation.
 Let us single out some of the queens of Bagratuni who stand out in the field of church building.
  It is noteworthy that Mrs. Khosrovanuysh, Queen of Ashot III the Merciful (953-977), whose patron is the role of Armenian women in the history of different occasions. Hatsuni's work "The Armenian woman in front of history", Venice, 1936, as well as R. referring to the construction of architectural monuments. Boyajyan: "The role of Armenian women in the construction of medieval architectural monuments (IX-XIII centuries)", "Newsletter. Science ", 1978, No. 9, pp. 71-81.
 403 HISTORY The monasteries of Sanahn and Haghbat were built in the Dzoraget valley (966-976).
  2 They were one of the major scientific and educational institutions of medieval Armenia.
 In 1001, under the care of the Armenian queen Katranide, the daughter of the Armenian king Gagik I (990-1020), Prince Vasak of Syunik. The Mother Cathedral of Ani (St. Astvatsatsin) Church 3 was built, the construction of which began in 989, during the reign of King Smbat II (977-990).
 Apart from queens, princesses were also involved in church building.
 Among them it is necessary to separate Mariam, the daughter of Ashot I Bagratuni (881/883890), who was the wife of Vasak Gabur, the prince of Syunik.
  Together with the Armenian Catholicos Mashtots Yeghivardetsi (Armenian Catholicos 897-898) in 874 builds S. Sevan Apostles and St. Astvatsatsin churches4.
  Mariam also builds the Shoghvaga Church in the name of the Holy Apostle Peter.
 Gndevank 5 was built with the support of Princess Sopa (Sopa), the wife of Prince Smbat of Syunik.
 The Armenian queens and princesses built the churches both on their own initiative and completed the construction work started by their husbands.
  One can meet many times the church-building initiatives of the Armenian princesses, which were carried out together with their relatives.
 In the inscription preserved on the wall of Ani Mother Cathedral we read: "... I, the Armenian queen of Katranide, daughter Vasaka Samuel Anetsi and successors, Chronology, diligently K. Matevosyan, Yerevan, 2014, p. 176 see The Collection of History covered by Vardan Vardapet, Venice, 1862, p. 90.
 Stepanos Taronetsi Asoghkan, History of space, S. Petersburg, 1885, p. 256 see also History of the State of Sisak, Archbishop Stepanos Orbelian of Syunik, Tbilissi (Tbilisi), 1910, p. 300.
 A memoir was handwritten and compiled by G. Hovsepian, h. A., (from the 5th century to 1250) Antelias, 1951, column 89.
 Divan of Armenian lithography, volume III, compiled by S. Barkhudaryan, Yerevan, 1967, page 13.
 404 HISTORY I relied on God for the mercy of the king of Syunik, and by order of my Gagka shahanshah, I built the holy Kataghike ... ”6.
 The wife of the Armenian prince Grigor Pahlavuni, "Mrs." Shushan, along with Vahram Pahlavuni and his other sons, is mentioned as the founder of Marmashen and a number of other churches7.
 895 The construction works of Tatev monastery start with the financial means of the Syunik princes, as well as "... the faithful lady Shushanay ..." 8 princesses.
 In Bagratuni Armenia, churches and monastic complexes were sometimes built to fulfill the visions of noble women, who "obliged" to undertake the construction of this or that spiritual church institution.
  This is evidenced by the example of Queen Mlke (Tamar), the wife of King Gagik Artsrun of Vaspurakan (908-943) (the latter was the daughter of Prince Shapuh I - brother of King Smbat I (890-914) - MG.
  With his advice and will, Gagik Artsruni builds S. on the shore island of Lake Van. Cross Church.
  As for Vanevan S. St. Gregory the Illuminator Church, it should be noted that the construction of the building in 903. He undertook the vision of the Armenian commander Shapuh Bagratuni, realizing the vision of his sister Syunik princess Mariam9.
  In the yard of this church in 914. The body of the Armenian king Smbat I Bagratuni was summed up.
 The church-building activity of noble ladies was encouraged by kings and princes.
  This can be proved by the example of Ashot I. The Armenian king encourages and sponsors his daughter's church-building endeavors, and by attending the opening ceremony of the Sevan monastery complex, the church inherits the villages and gardens of Varser, Tsamakaberd, Gomadzor, Berdk, Uryats Tap10.
 The ladies' churches were built mainly by the Christian Divan of Armenian lithography, volume I, compiled by H. Orbelin, Yerevan, 1966, page 35.
 Stepanos Orbelyan, page 223.
 Ibid., Pp. 181-182.
 Ibid., P. 174.
 There are 405 HISTORIES based on faith, and sometimes on the sunshine or the memory of their loved ones.
 Sanahni S. The Church of the Savior was built by Queen Khosrovanuysh with the help of the king for the sunshine of their sons Gurgen, Smbat and Gagik11.
 Princess Mariam had founded a congregation in Shoghvaga Church for the soul of her husband Vasak Gabur12.
  In addition, she vowed to build 30 churches in memory of her late husband.
 The Armenian queens and princesses, paying special attention to education and schooling, established numerous monasteries, relics (books) and schools in the above-mentioned churches and monastic institutions.
 One of the educational centers of medieval Armenia was also the Sanahni Magistros Seminary, which according to K. According to Ghafadaryan, it was probably built in the 11th century13.
 Among the buildings of the Sanahn monastic complex was also known the reliquary and the reliquary cell or bookstore.
 In medieval Armenia, manuscripts were kept with expensive church utensils and relics, and this was the place where this bookstore served.
  Sanahn bookstore was built in 1063. With the help of Queen Hranush, daughter of King David Anhogh of Lori (989-1048).
  This handbook of the Queen shows her caring attitude towards books and education in general.
  Under the sponsorship of the latter, S. of the same monastic complex was also built. Church of St. Gregory the Illuminator14.
 The Haghbat monastery complex was known as a major scientific and educational center of the time.
 The activity of Haghbat bookstore is of special importance and interest.
  The exact date of its construction is not known.
  It had a special significance in the organization of education in medieval Armenia.
  Educational activist K. Afadaryan, Sanahn Monastery and its inscriptions, Yerevan, 1957, p. 18.
 Stepanos Orbelyan, page 174.
 Ghafadaryan K., Sanahn Monastery and its inscriptions, pp. 29-30.
 Ibid., P. 33.
 406 HISTORY In addition to history, many manuscripts were written and copied there, of which we can single out only Haghbat (Getashen) 1211. The Gospel 15.
 In addition to the bookstore, the Haghbat school also assumed the most important functions of education here.
 In addition to church building, Armenian women were also involved in donation activities, appearing as generous donors.
 The subject of the donations could be real estate as well: movable property, money, holy books, dishes, expensive jewelry, items, etc.
 The study of the source and lithographic evidence of the donations gives an idea of ​​the donor's social status, property, profits, right to dispose of it, as well as the quantity, type, purpose and a number of other issues.
 In the Middle Ages, although women were considered to be members of the disenfranchised class, this assertion did not apply to noble women.
  Moreover, the traditions of medieval law, which are expressed in figurative inscriptions, prove the complete opposite16.
  Armenian queens and princesses had both immovable and movable property.
  Real estate was land - estates, both hereditary and treasury lands.
  Villages, gardens and other types of property were also part of the real estate of medieval women.
 This property was acquired paternally as an inheritance or dowry, and the Armenian kings or princes themselves often gave movable and immovable property to their wives.
  It is worth mentioning that King Smbat of Syunik (987-998) gave the village of Tegh to his wife Shahandukht17.
 Ghafadaryan, Haghbat, Yerevan, 1963, page 35.
 Samuelyan Kh., History of Ancient Armenian Law, vol. 1, Yerevan, 1939, p. 247.
 Stepanos Orbelyan, pp. 291-292.
 407 HISTORY Returning to the issue of property, let us mention that women could freely manage their property and the profit derived from it.
  For example, Vahram Pahlavuni's wife, Seda, donated a tenth of the harvest from her own village of Gagt to Bagnayr Monastery "... for the sake of the remembrance of Zarakan, my father Christ's Vasaka" 18.
  It is obvious that the income from the harvest was his property and the princess had a full right to manage it.
 In another case, Princess Mariam, Vasak's wife, bought 60,000 drams from the Arabs for the village of Shoghvag, exempted it from all secular taxes and donated it to the church as her own estate.
  The same fate befell the village of Gner in Mazaz province, which the princess had bought for 3,000 dahekan19.
  What is interesting here is not only the princess' right to establish free trade relations, but also the next circumstance, that is, the princess's manual to exempt the village from all taxes.
 We also meet cases of tax exemption of villages elsewhere.
 The wife of Hovhannes-Smbat (1020-1041) exempts Yereruyk from tax for her son and husband's sunshine20.
 The tradition of donating villages to the church continues in the future as well.
  Among the donors we can single out Hovhannes Smbat's wife, Gagik Bagratuni and Katranide's granddaughter, Senekerim's daughter "Marvel of the Abkhazian and Armenian" 21 Mariam.
 The latter donated the village of Tarus to the church of Marmashen "... because of (my) forgiveness of my grandfather's sin and my kindness and retribution to Kata was well received by the saints of the church of St. Peter in Christ. .
 Many villages were also donated to Tatev, Sanahni and other monasteries.
  Tatev monastery S. Alishan, Shirak, opening of Poghos-Petros church. Topography, Venice, 1881, p. 113.
 Stepanos Orbelyan, page 174.
 Alishan, Shirak, page 171.
 Ibid., P. 149.
 Ibid., Pp. 149-150.
 408 HISTORY Princess Shushan of Syunik, mentioned among the participants of the ceremony, donates the villages of Tsatsard and Karatnis to the monastery23.
  Hamaspruhi, the daughter of Prince Babgen of Syunik, dedicates the village of Halis and a large garden 24 to the same monastery.
  Shahandukht, the wife of King Smbat I of Syunik (987-998), died in Tatev Monastery in 998 for her husband. He donates 6,000 drams to the village of Tegh in Haband province, which, according to the historian, he built 25.
  The village of Arit is also dedicated to Tatev26.
 King Ashot III and Queen Khosrovanuysh enriched the monastery of Sanahn a lot. "... Geughorians and homeland, mountains and valleys" 27.
 Gardens and parks make up a large number of donations.
 Sopin, the daughter of Ashot III, dedicates David's garden to the Holy Catholic Church of Mren.
  "I gave Sopi's daughter to the great Armenian and Georgian queen Ashot Shahanshah and established David's garden as a holy shrine ..." 28.
 Shushan Pahlavuni, the wife of 29 women, 994 Mrvan's donuts are donated to St. Gregory Church in Ani30.
 We learn from Shushan Pahlavuni's protocol that S. About donating Mrvan's rope and D (80) drams to St. Gregory Church.
  In return for this donation, Shushan Pahlavuni demanded from the clergy of the church to perform JZ (16) services in the total amount of D (80) AMD, of which L (30) for Seda and վ (50) AMD for Mrvan (31).
 Stepanos Orbelyan, page 229.
 Divan of Armenian lithography, volume II, compiled by S. Barkhudaryan, Yerevan, 1960, page 51.
 Stepanos Orbelyan, pp. 290-291.
 Ibid., P. 322.
 Memorial from Sanahno Van (Sanahni Keotuk), diligently by P. Muradyan, S. Etchmiadzin, 2007, page 63.
 Alishan, Shirak, page 138.
 For more details on the author of the inscription Shushan Pahlavuni, see Grigoryan G., Donations to the churches and monasteries of Ani (X-XIV centuries) Yerevan, 2002, pp. 15-16.
 Divan I, page 32.
 Ibid., P. 31.
 409 HISTORY These references are interesting in several respects.
  In addition to the fact that a clear monetary donation was made, that is, the subject of the donation was mentioned - the money, as well as its quantity and the donor's demand to serve a liturgy in the appropriate amount.
 We attach importance to the next mention because the mentioned donation is given with the right of lifelong trinity.
 Kupghidukht Syun, the wife of Prince Hrahat, "... a building named Mach in the province of Baghats ..." 32 867 Mountains and fields, meadows and fields, rivers, water and land, trees and saplings are dedicated to St. Tatev. The cross "... to enjoy the episcopal see forever" 33.
 In medieval Armenia, the donation of manuscripts was also widespread.
  Among the donations made by Mariam, the daughter of Kyurike I (10491089), to the Haghpat Monastery is also mentioned "... my glorified gospel" 34.
 The names of the Armenian queens and princesses are also connected with the preservation of spiritual and cultural values.
  Let us single out the Gospel of the same name, which became the subject of special care of Mlke Taguhi, the wife of King Gagik Artsrun of Vaspurakan (908-943), which he handed over to St. Varaga Monastery, which he built with his own funds. Astvatsatsin Church.
 Mariam (Marem), the daughter of King Gagik of Kars (1029-1065) and Gorandukht, twice commissioned the interpretation of the Gospel of John to be translated into Armenian35.
 The translation of the Gospel was also ordered by Smbat Bagratuni and Mrs. Marem from Syunik36.
 Besides the queens and princesses who ordered the Gospels, we also meet the names of ordinary women. Mrs. Stepanos Orbelyan, page 219.
 In the same place.
 Ghafadaryan K., Haghbat, page 175.
 Manuscript memoir, column 64.
 Notebooks of Armenian manuscripts. 5th-12th centuries, with diligence A. Matevosyan, Yerevan, 1988, page 37.
 410 HISTORY Tsovuk in Talasha monastery of Kghot province in 1018 received the Gospel he had commissioned 37.
 They bought the Gospel in 1183. Khosrovidukht with his brothers Gohar, the Prophet and Sukias38.
 In addition to ordering, receiving, and purchasing gospels, there are also records of women saving the Gospels.
  Let us single out from them only the case of "... only a faithful woman, whose name she will call Shushan" 39.
 Such care for spiritual and cultural values, of course, was conditioned both by the Christian faith and the importance of spiritual upbringing and education.
 Thus, similar bibliographic and lithographic facts allow us to claim that the pro-church activities of queens and princesses in Bagratuni Armenia had a wide scope. From church building, donations to Christian upbringing, education, and more.
 .
