In the modern world, which is characterized by dynamically developing and ever-changing tendencies, the role of economic diplomacy is growing.
  No matter how much we value its significance, how well we perceive its essence, and finally, how well we master its tools, economic diplomacy is almost everywhere, from the local environment around us to the global economy1.
 It is an inseparable part of modern diplomacy, and in developing and developed countries there is an obvious tendency to make the economy the center of diplomacy and politics.
  In the context of economic globalization, comparative solutions to the problems posed by the economic crisis show that economic diplomacy is becoming a source of traditional diplomacy, serving the mobilization of investment and export support.
  In this regard, the need to coordinate economic activities, internationalize and promote economic interests, attract business and investment at the level of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs to achieve synergetic results.
  Active involvement in economic diplomacy has become an essential feature of many state institutions.
  Their main concern is how to secure a better position in world markets, where the rules and regulations of the game in an environment of unfair competition, not only economic but also non-economic, are often covertly aimed at protecting the national interests of individual countries. the maximum possible share in the distribution of gross national product in the world.
  To achieve such goals, all countries use different possible structures and strategies, as well as diplomacy pursuing clear goals.
  Economic diplomacy has become the most important tool and function of nations, Economic diplomacy is of French origin (La diplomatie 281 ECONOMICS for states, international organizations and companies in the process of integration.
  Moreover, economic diplomacy has become a primary means of penetrating the world market.
  In the modern world, international economic relations are a system of power relations, where political and economic interests are intertwined. and a certain evolution of perceptions of economic diplomacy over time.
 Professional literature includes fundamentally different definitions and approaches to the essence, goals and objectives of economic diplomacy.
 Each of them has its reasoning and it is difficult to assess the more or less value of this or that approach [2, pp.41-56].
  In order to understand all this, especially in practice, it is necessary to take into account the specifics of the given historical period, country or region, as well as the visions and targets of future development strategies and programs.
 Our perception of economic diplomacy is based on the belief that the two most important pillars of a country's economic progress are the provision of a high level of economic security and competitiveness.
 Economic diplomacy cannot be a sphere of absolutely independent and self-serving activity.
  We believe that it should serve these two pillars.
 There is a misconception that the term "diplomacy" is used mainly in the country's foreign relations.
  282 ECONOMICS Any meeting, discussion and negotiation with the accredited international organizations, foreign embassies and consulates in Armenia, various groups, delegations and individuals visiting Armenia should be considered in the context of TD.
 Regardless of how theoretical economic diplomacy is perceived in different countries, it is important to clarify the essence of economic diplomacy, its problems and goals for each country, taking into account the existing conditions and development trends.
 In our view, economic diplomacy is the targeted, purposeful and effective use of the intellectual and material resources available in Armenia and the Diaspora for the benefit of the country's economic security, improving the quality of life of the population and competitive human capital formation and sale serving Armenia and Armenians.
 First, it is important to look at economic diplomacy in two dimensions: - external and - internal.
 In foreign economic diplomacy we can distinguish - state, - people's, - parliamentary, - business.
 Domestic economic diplomacy may include - public diplomacy, - international organizations accredited in the country, - foreign embassies accredited in the country, - companies with foreign capital operating in the country, - foreign individuals and legal entities visiting the country, - individuals and legal entities specializing in export and import. with foreign capital and mixed investment companies, - state, non-state, private, non-governmental organizations representing Armenia in international platforms, - representing Armenia in the format of regional cooperation, - with other individuals and legal entities, - negotiation and other relations aimed at achieving certain goals and programs.
 Important components of foreign economic diplomacy are: - Official representations of the country in international economic organizations and regional associations - Embassies, consulates and other diplomatic missions of the Republic of Armenia, - Civil society of Armenia, in particular, non-governmental, non-governmental organizations and individuals representing the expert community at various conferences and meetings; RA citizens temporarily abroad for personal, business, tourism or other purposes, - RA citizens living abroad as temporary or permanent residents, - businessmen and business groups, - RA state, public, business structures and other persons representing their interests,
 In the field of economic diplomacy carried out at the state level, it is necessary to separate - Consultations, - Formal meetings, - Working meetings, - Bilateral negotiations, - Multilateral negotiations, - Other contacts aimed at the implementation of economic programs.
 It is obvious that there are certain expectations from any sphere of public administration, from each direction of economic policy, as well as from economic diplomacy.
 It should be noted that in general, economic diplomacy plays a direct role in resolving the fundamental issues of peace, security and cooperation.
 Diplomatic initiatives create partnerships so that nations can work together to resolve bilateral and multilateral issues.
  Economic diplomacy is directly related to the art and tactics of adequate communication and negotiation with internal and external forces, which use political and legal methods and approaches to solve problems both bilaterally and multilaterally.
 When assessing the effectiveness of economic diplomacy, it is important to consider the following key factors: - to what extent it contributes to internal and external security, - to what extent it reduces existing threats, - to what extent it prevents the emergence of potential threats, the national, state and economic interests of partner countries - to what extent it supports regional and global security.
 Therefore, economic diplomacy plays a crucial role in establishing effective international relations, concluding and implementing mutually beneficial agreements, as well as pursuing priority economic goals for the country.
 Individuals and institutions involved in economic diplomacy can help each other establish partnerships around the world so that a single country and its involuntary partners can understand global issues, maintain global competitiveness, and materialize the opportunities of globalization and the digital age.
  If in the recent past diplomacy, particularly economic diplomacy, was considered a quiet, behind-the-scenes communication between governments, states and international organizations, [6] it is now significantly diversified in nature and much can be expected from it.
 It is important that the state clarifies the problems, the solution of which will be aimed at economic diplomacy.
  In our opinion, the following main ones can be distinguished from such problems. a) Participation in regional integration processes (EU, EEU and other groups, strategic alliances), joint use of existing human and other resources and efforts to minimize the level of potential vulnerability to globalization challenges and jointly address sustainable development goals b) Development of new models of cooperation and formation of alliances with non-governmental organizations, combining components of traditional and innovative, alternative models, which will increase the efficiency of regulatory processes; c) Reform and improvement of the management system, promoting decentralization within the system
 The main problems of economic diplomacy stem from the vision of the country's development, priorities and certain national and state peculiarities.
  In the case of Armenia, we believe, they lead to the following main goals: 1. realization of national economic interests in the world economy, 2. protection of economic security through diplomatic methods, 3. increase of the country's international competitiveness.
 During and after World War II, more than ever before, the value of peace for individuals and nations increased dramatically.
  It became clear that the problems accumulated over the centuries, existing and future, 287 ECONOMICS are not forced solutions, but agreements reached through human intelligence, knowledge and mutual understanding.
  They began to pay more attention to mutual understanding initiatives and negotiations at various levels.
  The diplomatic toolkit became more widely used.
  Former political enemies realized the need to work out mutually beneficial scenarios through diplomacy.
  Thus, gradually, former adversaries began to treat each other as involuntary partners and even allies.
 John Maynard Keynes, the forefather of the new world order, proposed the establishment of two world structures to support the reconstruction and development of the economies of war-torn and war-torn countries and to ensure the stability of monetary relations in order to understand each other's interests in peace, to realize them jointly, to ensure stability and predictability.
  Thus, in our opinion, a new international economy was started, the application of new principles of peaceful coexistence and the formation and development of a new international structure.
  In other words, economic diplomacy aimed at establishing peace began.
  The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (now the World Bank Group) and the International Monetary Fund were established in 1944 in Bretton Woods, USA, and became operational in 1946 [7], when their founder had already completed his earthly life.
 New developments enabled George Marshall to present to the US Congress the following year, in 1947, an action plan to provide financial assistance for the recovery of the economies of warring countries, which became better known as the Marshall Plan [8, pp. 23-45].
  The key direction of this plan was the newly started economic diplomacy, the quality injected into the interstate relations, which radically changed the further course of the development of the world economy.
  The establishment of the Organization of European Economic Cooperation (OECD) "forced" by the Marshall Plan [9, pp.103-107] in 1948 greatly contributed to the establishment of peace between European countries with a hundred-year-old bloody history.
  It is noteworthy that an important precondition for receiving financial assistance under the Marshall Plan was that European countries themselves had to determine the priority list of facilities to be restored or built with US financial assistance and unite in one organization to make the processes organized and regulated.
 Another result of the triumph of economic diplomacy was the signing in 1951 of an agreement establishing the Coal and Steel Union, a former partner in the war and a partner between Germany and France, as well as their allies.
 Thus, thanks to economic diplomacy, the threat of World War III, the resumption of hostilities, and revenge was effectively eliminated through the agreement on the use of key resources in military-industrial complexes, coal and steel, and joint control over them.
 It is obvious that the source of modern economic diplomacy is the need for peace and the set of methods, principles and approaches developed for it.
  However, it would be primitive to limit ourselves to the mentioned realities and to derive everything from the need to establish peace.
  Moreover, the implementation of the Marshall Plan did not lead to proper conclusions for the foreign ministries of the leading countries and the political diplomacy conducted by them.
  Moreover, the stereotype of political diplomacy marked the beginning of a new type of conflict — the Cold War — which had far-reaching economic, financial, and psychological consequences for mankind.
 289 ECONOMICS The first decades of the third millennium are characterized by rapid developments and qualitative developments mediated by technological innovations.
  Regional and global projects aimed at establishing peace and security are currently being highlighted.
 One of them is the one-lane road project initiated by China, which is, in fact, an important attempt to revive the Great Silk Road.
  The latter presupposes active cooperation of business circles and experts through the dialogue of the states.
  Moreover, it inevitably leads to the discovery and realization of cooperative advantages.
 In order for a state to promote its economic and trade policy priorities in the region and around the world, it must first have competent and adequate potential individuals to identify common interests in the international arena and to implement them in line with the values ​​and interests of different states, organizations and companies.
 In this sense, economic diplomacy can also be considered as a unique bridge between the country and the world.
  Following the development priorities of our country, the Republic of Armenia, therefore, must develop and pursue a stable foreign economic policy and conduct active economic diplomacy, guided by the principles that are universal, stable and have a logical continuity.
 First, we must strive to build and maintain strong bilateral and multilateral relations, which will ensure Armenia's role as a full and reliable partner in both European and Asian regions.
  Therefore, it is necessary to create a flexible foreign policy strategy that can adapt to the rapidly changing environment.
  At the same time, we must avoid sudden and unexpected changes, 290 ECONOMICS, which may lead to new challenges for the continuation of our relations with certain countries.
 It is necessary to soberly analyze global developments, assess the created geopolitical environment, as well as regional tendencies, the interests of individual states and regional groups, strategic alliances.
  Expert analyzes also provide an opportunity to make sound forecasts and develop substantiated scenarios for state security and economic development for different possible developments, based on Armenia's development priorities.
 In addition, it is important to develop and implement comprehensive foreign economic and political initiatives in the interests of regional stability, the effectiveness of which will depend on the ability to strengthen the institutional basis of foreign policy, so that it is possible to implement commitments in various international formats.
  This, in turn, will allow us to involve our current and potential other allies and partners in mutually beneficial, strong and trustworthy bilateral and multilateral relations.
 No less important is the fact that economic diplomacy focuses on the continuity of national interests stemming from the vision of state development, which must be at the same time harmonized with the norms of international law and the goals of sustainable development.
 Finally, it is necessary to involve the professional potential of the Armenian Diaspora in economic diplomacy and by pursuing the above-mentioned principles and goals, it will be possible to pursue national goals, developing and strengthening not only Armenia-Diaspora, but also Diaspora-Diaspora economic ties.
 A prerequisite for the effective implementation of the state economic diplomacy is the education of state officials with relevant knowledge and life experience, who will present and pursue clearly defined goals in 291 ECONOMICS in Armenia and abroad.
  It is important that economic diplomacy is represented by specialists selected through competitions who have the skill to focus on economic diplomacy to ensure our core national interest.
  This requires that the Economic Diplomacy Service include qualified professional diplomats, as well as skilled businessmen, experts and technocrats from different sectors of the economy, who with relevant life experience will be able to contribute to the solution of political and economic agenda issues.
  Given the concept and strategy of scientifically sound economic diplomacy, given the economic and socio-political developments in the international arena and the need for active involvement in the international arena, which stems mainly from the pursuit of economic goals, promoting economic diplomacy the ability to create a more peaceful, prosperous region for us and our partner countries.
 In order to train professionals in the field, it is important to consider the following possible aspects of education: International economics, coordination of foreign affairs networks, economic activity, application of the country's innovations, attraction of foreign investments, closer contacts with foreign partners.
 From a practical point of view, it is important to consider the main concepts used in the following key areas: economics, diplomacy and economic diplomacy in the current processes of globalization.
  In particular, it is necessary to take into account comprehensive economic diplomacy in the process of globalization.
  Of particular importance are key areas of economic diplomacy, such as attracting foreign investment and promoting innovation and its application.
  The role of planning in achieving the goals of economic diplomacy deserves special attention.
 Planning in economic diplomacy should, in practice, facilitate the networking of various strategic initiatives and programs within the framework of a long-term joint strategy, as well as support the Government's policies and actions to clarify the expected results of international economic integration.
  At the same time, planning can facilitate the training of government officials in the context of achieving the results of economic diplomacy through the planning, organization and implementation of the country's economic policy.
 We are convinced that the importance of investing in science and education will increase.
  In particular, it will be manifested in the development of current basic knowledge of the role of planning in economic diplomacy.
  It will be possible to do it with the following logical connection. Analysis of concepts, phenomena and processes related to economic diplomacy, which should be followed by the classification of concepts, phenomena and processes related to economic diplomacy.
  In addition, it is necessary to realistically assess the impact of planning on economic diplomacy.
 .
