The Republic of Armenia, being a secular state, pays special attention to the secularism of education, fixing it in the legal acts regulating the subject field.
  Article 5 of the RA Law on Education defines the principles of state policy in the field of education, one of which is the secular nature of education in educational institutions [Articles 5, 5], [Articles 6, 4], [7, Article 5].
 Today, the secularism of education is very often perceived as the exclusion of any influence of the church on the educational system, which is a completely exaggerated and one-sided approach in the field of perception of the concept of a secular state.
 The study of the issue of the vitality of education secularism acquires special importance especially in the context of the cooperation between the Republic of Armenia and the Armenian Apostolic Church.
  Moreover, highly appreciating the role of the national church in the development of the culture of the Armenian people, the state has formed a rather close field of cooperation with the latter in the field of education.
 Thus, it follows from the content of Article 17 of the RA Law on Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organizations that the state does not hinder the implementation of the monopoly missions of the National Church, in particular, "freely preach and spread its religion throughout the Republic of Armenia ..." [4 , Article 17, point (c)].
 Of course, the phrase "the whole territory of the Republic of Armenia" in the sense of spreading and propagating the creed of the Armenian Apostolic Church does not refer to general and higher education institutions, as otherwise the essence of the secular principle of education will be distorted and the latter will be merely declarative. .
 Considering the domestic experience of discussing the issue, it should be emphasized that there is no officially recognized religious subject as such in the public schools of the Republic of Armenia.
 In 2002, under an agreement signed between the Government of the Republic of Armenia and the Armenian Apostolic Church, the subject "History of the Armenian Church" was introduced in the curriculum of primary and secondary school classes1.
  Moreover, the elaboration of the textbooks of the mentioned subject, the financial agreement was signed by the RA Prime Minister Andranik Margaryan and the Catholicos of All Armenians His Holiness Karekin II.
  It was re-established. The development and publication of the 1901 JURISDICTION was to be provided by the National Church, and the scientific-methodological management of their creation and other responsibilities were reserved for the RA Ministry of Education and Science2.
 Between His Holiness Hayrapet and the RA Minister of Education and Science 2005 by an agreement.
  2003-2004 During the academic year, the subject "History of the Armenian Church" was introduced in the 4th and 5th grades.
  2005 The subject was included in the curriculum of 4-10 grades of general education schools.
 Since 2005 The Center for Christian Education (CDP) of the Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin took over the control of the issues related to the teaching of the subject, and the organization of teacher training courses was assigned to the CDP, the RA Ministry of Education and Science, the National Education Institute and the Armenian Bible Society.
  See, in detail: At the same time, the standard and curriculum of the subject "History of the Armenian Church" of the general education basic school (grades 5-9, 10-11) were approved, as well as the following general objectives of the course were defined: a) to contribute to the completion of the national-spiritual image of the rising generation by introducing and communicating national and universal values; to penetrate and take root in the field, c) to develop such scientific-pedagogical approaches, which are based on the basic principles of pedagogy: accessibility, continuity, taking into account age peculiarities; integration with other subjects, etc. d) complete the scope of issues related to Armenian history and culture in Armenian studies, strengthening the knowledge of learners in those subjects, providing additional necessary information, as well as highlighting the spiritual-ecclesiastical factors determining the course of many events and phenomena. Of the RA Minister of Education and Science 17.08.2012 On making changes in the order N 708-A / Q 06.09.2013 No. 1075-A / Q and "On approving the standard and program of the subject" History of the Armenian Church "for 10-11th grades of the general education basic school" 17.07.2012 Orders No. 709 A / C // 191 JURISDICTION
  There were observations that the subject identifies national and religious affiliation, and suggestions were made to make the subject of the history of the Armenian Church non-compulsory. [21]
 One of the controversial questions about the mentioned course was that, according to the opponents, the course forms a negative attitude of the students towards the religious minorities in Armenia [20, p. 40].
  Moreover, in some cases, the subject of "History of the Armenian Church" was attributed to extremist assessments [18] or unjustified desires4.
  All this led to skepticism about the implementation of the principle of a secular state5.
 Touching upon the issue, the Government of the Republic of Armenia by the decision No. 439-N of 2010 approved the procedure for formation and approval of the state standard of general education and the state standard of general education, which is fixed in Annex 2. According to the observations of some authors, some teachers start the course with the Lord's Prayer. The disciples stand up and cross themselves at the end.
  See Eurasia Partnership Foundation, Freedom of Religion and Children and Youth belonging to National Minorities, edited by G. Ter-Gabrielyan, Yerevan, 2014 page 25.
 As surprising and even terrifying as it may seem, it was suggested to include in the textbooks of the subject "History of the Armenian Church" such topics that have become topical in the world, such as the problems of crematoria, euthanasia and same-sex marriage.
  [20, page 29].
 It is necessary to pay attention to the principles set forth in the "History of the Armenian Church" school subject program, where it says: "The development of the subject is based on the secular principle of education.
  The study of the history of the Armenian Church within the framework of the presented course is a secular education, a type of religious education of a specific ethnocultural, ethno-religious and civilizational orientation "// [15].
 192 JURISDICTION The minimum requirements for the content of elementary and basic education curricula set out in the "Society, Social Sciences" educational focus on religious diversity.
  It is noteworthy that the appendix to the decision does not mention religious diversity in the curriculum of the secondary (high) school.
 At the same time, referring to the issue of ensuring religious diversity, it should be emphasized that in addition to the knowledge of the history of the national church, theological direction and Christian teaching in general, the subject of "History of the Armenian Church" also provides information on animal and plant worship (totemism). About the Armenian or pre-Christian faith, Hindu, Buddhist, Zoroastrian, Muslim religions, Greco-Roman mythology, thus acting as a unique source of teaching different religions.
 It should be emphasized that the secularism of education does not require the inadmissibility of teaching religion in the field of education.
  The UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights affirms: "Education should promote mutual understanding, tolerance and friendship between all peoples, racial and religious groups ..." [2].
  These provisions of the Declaration allow the general history of religion and ethics to be taught in public schools if it is conducted impartially and objectively.
  Moreover, the exclusion of religion from the state education system, in some sense, even contradicts the RA Law on Education, the priority of universal values ​​declared in the field of education in the field of education [Article 5, Part 1], as well as 11- According to the provisions of Article 1, "the content of education ensures: 1) the formation of world recognition of learners in accordance with the modern level (degree) of knowledge and educational programs, 2) the assimilation of national and universal values ​​by learners" [5, Article 11] Part 2].
  The latter inevitably implies the teaching of the history of religions as an important component and cultural value of the spiritual life of different nations.
  Therefore, it can be concluded that the teaching of religions as a unique system of worldview is necessary for the broad-mindedness and worldview of the child and man in general, to be in touch with universal values.
 It is another matter that the teaching of the religious subject, proceeding from the secular principle of education, should be based on pluralism and open-mindedness, which are the cornerstone of democracy, and should not turn into propaganda of any religious direction and sowing religious intolerance.
 It follows from this legal perception that in any case religious propaganda in public and higher education institutions is incompatible with the essence of the secular principle of education, even in the case of a dominant or dominant religion.
  In this respect, the content of Article 4 of the RA Law on General Education is a bit problematic, which stipulates that the secularism of education is not absolute, and in cases provided by law, the possibility of exclusive permission for religious propaganda in educational institutions may be established [Article 6, 4. , Point 8].
  Let us just add that secular education, even as an exception, cannot provide for the expansion of religious propaganda in educational institutions.
 Given these concerns, it is important to note the Toledo Guiding Principles, based on secular approaches, which, although not a binding document and of a purely advisory nature, nevertheless contain valuable guidelines6.
  In accordance with these principles, Spain, in conjunction with the OSCE / ODIHR Advisory Council on Religion or Freedom of Religion, initiated the development of the Toledo Guidelines on Guidelines, which set out the basic principles of religion taught in public schools in the OSCE participating States. Curriculum development, teacher training, compliance with the basic principles of secular education, democracy and human rights.
 It should be noted that the Government of Armenia's National Human Rights Strategy Action Plan was designed to promote the tolerance of different religions and denominations in public schools and to disseminate the Toledo Guidelines, especially to teachers and educators in the history of the Armenian Church. in the region [9].
 Hence the reasonable question that if the "History of the Armenian Church" is a secular subject of Armenological orientation, then why is the publication and dissemination of a manual on the teaching of religions and beliefs important for those responsible in that field?
  The problem, in essence, is that historical references to religious organizations, whatever they may be, may contain potential dangers of religious propaganda and discrimination.
  Therefore, the localization of the Toledo guiding principles is a useful priority in the context of the steady realization of secular education.
 At the same time, it is appropriate to note the fact that the Center for Christian Education of the Mother See, as a standard for teaching the subject of the subject "History of the Armenian Church" in terms of teaching subjects.
 The Toledo Guidelines set out the methodological guidelines for the teaching of religion and the preparation of curricula, based on the universal right to freedom of religion or belief, based on mutual respect, tolerance and the exclusion of interfaith conflicts. [26] visits school, attends classes, raises the issue of replacing an inappropriate teacher.
  We believe that it would be more justified if these control functions were reserved exclusively for the state competent body.
 Of course, the involvement of the national church in the development of textbooks and their further improvement is welcome, and indeed stems from the need to strengthen state-church relations, but in our opinion, the control of any course by clergy in secular educational institutions is incompatible with the secular principle of education.
 We agree with the observations that due to the professional qualities, beliefs and values ​​of the teaching teachers, the teaching of the history of the national religious organization may deviate from its established principles and goals, predetermining the supremacy of the religious propaganda element.
 In the context of what has been said, it should be noted that the goals of the subject "History of the Armenian Church", in a broad sense, include the transmission of the history of the national church to the students, and not the sowing of religious faith or anti-religious worldview.
  That is why it is urgent to introduce structures so that the formal function of the subject does not turn into actual propaganda in religious propaganda, and thus does not hinder the implementation of the idea of ​​a secular state, which unquestionably requires secular educational institutions to refrain from instilling atheistic ideas and religious doctrine. by spreading and preaching.
 The next important question concerns the compulsory teaching of the subject "History of the Armenian Church".
  Does the lack of a refusal procedure violate the exercise of the right to education in accordance with one's own beliefs?
 Perhaps, it is necessary to note that the "History of the Armenian Church" is officially a secular subject, however, the external observation is enough to notice the overwhelming dominance of the Christian teaching in the textbooks.
 In the framework of the study of the secularism of education in the Republic of Armenia, it is necessary to consider the legal practice of the European Court of Human Rights related to this issue in the following cases, in particular: A) in the case of Folgeron and Others v. Norway, 29.06.2007 The decision [23], the background of which is as follows: In 1997, a compulsory course on Christianity, Religion and Philosophy was introduced in Norwegian primary schools, which did not provide for a complete drop-out procedure.
  A group of parents who are members of the Norwegian Humanitarian Association applied to the school administration to release their children from school, but it was rejected.
  The plaintiffs, after exhausting their domestic courts, filed a lawsuit with the European Court, alleging that the lack of a complete waiver of the case violated their freedom of thought, conscience and religion under Article 9 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and Convention 1 The right of parents provided for in Article 2 of the Protocol to provide education and training for their children in accordance with their religious and philosophical beliefs.
  Examining the case, the Court concluded that there had been a violation of Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, at the same time stating that the subject matter itself relied mainly on the teaching of Christianity and did not ensure universal neutrality.
 JURISDICTION B) In the case of Hasan and Eylem Zeng v. Turkey, 09.10.2007 decision [24].
  The background of this case is as follows: Aylem Zeng, a citizen of Turkey, being a follower of Alevism, studied at the Istanbul Secondary School, where the subject of "Religious Culture and Ethics" was taught.
  The father, Hassan Zeng, asked to exempt his daughter from the mentioned course, as it mainly contained knowledge of Sunni orientation and, thus, violates the right to provide education in accordance with his child's beliefs.
  After hearing the case, the Court unanimously found a violation of Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
  Comparing the methodological guidelines and textbooks set by the Turkish Ministry of Education for the "Religious Culture and Ethics" course, the court noted that the Turkish education system does not take an adequate approach to religious education, but ignores other religious directions by prioritizing Islam.
 The above-mentioned legal positions prove that compulsory religious education based on the supremacy of one religion is incompatible with the right of parents, proclaimed by the Convention, to provide education and training for their children in accordance with their religious and philosophical beliefs.
 It should be added that the right to respect religious and philosophical beliefs belongs to the child's parents and not to the child himself.
  The obligation to respect these beliefs, however, is subject to the direct right of the child to education.
 Without underestimating the role of Christianity in ensuring the civilized progress of the Armenian people and state, it should be emphasized that the compulsory teaching of the subject "History of the Armenian Church" in the secondary schools of the Republic of Armenia can not be compatible with the religious beliefs of the child's parents. Optional procedures.
 It is also important to note that the principle of voluntary religious education stems from the content of the laws governing relations with the national church.
 Certainly, the definition of the procedure for refusing the subject "History of the Armenian Church" cannot diminish the invaluable role and mission of the national church in the field of education.
  The subject "History of the Armenian Church" is first of all a subject of Armenological orientation, in which the history of the national church, its place and role among the national institutions are reflected.
  The 1800-year history of the national religious structure is an inseparable part of the history of the Armenian people and, of course, it is imperative to teach that history within a separate subject.
 The view is right, according to which the necessity of teaching the subject of the history of the Armenian Church is, in fact, conditioned by the mission of the Church to develop the national culture and preserve the national identity [19, p. 15].
 Of course, it is necessary to emphasize the role of national traditions, description, worldview in the field of education, considering the national culture and religion as a component of education and upbringing.
  In this respect, the caring attitude of the state authorities towards both the history of the national church and the Christian ideology, which stems from the patriotic services provided by the national church, is also justified.
 However, the rights and interests of the non-religious minority, whose religious beliefs differ from the religious approaches proclaimed within the framework of the "History of the Armenian Church", should also be emphasized.
  In this sense, it is necessary to reasonably combine the minimum requirements of a secular state within the framework of close cooperation with the national church.
 199 JURISDICTION In the context of the discussion of this issue, it is necessary to mention the final observations of the UN Commission on the Rights of the Child in 2013 on the third and fourth joint periodic report of the Republic of Armenia, where the Commission proposed "revising the school curriculum to reflect Compulsory teaching of the subject "History" [27].
 Thus, summarizing the results of the analysis made in this subchapter, the following conclusions can be summarized: 1) one of the important components of the principle of the secular state is the secularism of education.
  It is a necessary precondition for the neutrality of the educational environment in a secular state, the exclusion of discrimination on the basis of religious beliefs, which implies the inadmissibility of religious propaganda, discrimination based on religious affiliation, 2) reserving the principle of secularity of education in the Republic of Armenia; The requirement of the legal regulation of part 1 of Article 1, according to which, when interpreting the provisions of the Constitution on fundamental human and civil rights and freedoms, it is also necessary to take into account the practice of the European Court of Human Rights, however.It is necessary to reserve the control over the educational process on the subject of "History of the Armenian Church" exclusively to the competent state body, and the compulsory teaching of that subject and the lack of procedures for refusing it can be a barrier to freedom of conscience and religion among dissidents and distort both state secularism and secularism. The importance of the principle of religious pluralism.
 .
