The executive is endowed with a fairly wide range of powers, and naturally, in all states, regardless of the form of government, the executive is controlled to avoid the possibility of various abuses.
  Today, factors such as the instability of the political process, population growth, its needs and interests lead to periodic crises in a number of state legal institutions, which first of all expand and intensify the activities of the executive branch.
  And the naturally created conditions make the control over the executive body more necessary than ever.
 The exercise of this control is one of the main powers of the parliament.
  To emphasize the necessity and importance of the institution of parliamentary control, let us refer to the opinions of several jurists.
  Thus, according to AA Mishin, the executive branch is characterized by 32 JURISDICTION as the most active and dynamic element of government, which is subject to legal regulation to a minimum [2 p. 219].
 MV Baglai also expresses himself adequately, who, in order to emphasize the broad powers of the executive power, defines it as a state unit, which in practice organizes the life of the people [3, p. 553].
  Thus, it becomes obvious that the legal restriction of the executive power, regardless of the political regime of states or other factors, is relevant.
  The wider the scope of the activity of the executive bodies, the greater the possibility of abuse, therefore, every aspect must be within the law, and the legal-political institutionalization of the institution of parliamentary control is the most important guarantee in this process.
 Therefore, parliamentary oversight becomes imperative in order to analyze the most effective activities of the government, the harmonization of the entire state mechanism and, of course, the practice of implementing the existing legislation.
  The creation of effective mechanisms of parliamentary control, especially on the way to building the rule of law, is one of the most important issues.
  According to V. Orlando, the main function of control is the exercise of permanent and active control over all branches of the administration by the parliament.
  Thus, we can clearly say that parliamentary control is the external control of the executive power, one of the elements of state control.
  It is an independent institution of parliamentarism, which includes various forms of control [4, p. 139].
 S.A. Kotularyevsky also considered the oversight function extremely important, noting that "in the modern state, the oversight function of the parliament is as important as the inevitability of strengthening the government, which holds the threads of legislative and budgetary work in its hands" [5, p. 264].
 Parliamentary control is exercised on the basis of an important principle, that is, the council 33 JURISDICTION expresses the will of the people and therefore must be able to control the implementation of state policy.
  Ineffective parliamentary oversight will lead to the seizure of power by the executive and the destruction of democratic institutions.
  It is obvious that especially for a state governed by the rule of law, parliamentary control, which operates lawfully and dynamically, is vital [6, p. 4].
 PI Novgordtsev mentions that back in the Middle Ages the idea of ​​popular sovereignty was one of the most famous values ​​of legal relations.
  This idea was a further formulation of the government's legal dependence on society.
  It presupposes for the people the permanent right of control and supremacy over the government [7, p. 23].
 SA Avagyan considers that parliamentary oversight should be considered as an independent institution of parliamentarism, the purpose of which is not only to ensure the observance and implementation of laws adopted by the parliament, including the interests of the population, but also to exercise control over the executive. , p. Let us also study the scope and object of the subjects of the Institute of Parliamentary Control.
  Clarifying the scope of parliamentary oversight, it should be noted that it is in fact quite broad and includes the governmental majority in parliament and the opposition [9, p. 13].
 The object of the institute under discussion is the activity of the officials of the executive bodies, which aims to reveal the illegality or inefficiency of the latter.
 Let's talk about the applicability of the institute of parliamentary control in foreign countries.
  Naturally, the real scope of the powers of the parliament of a particular country in the sphere of control depends on a number of factors, such as the state structure, the political regime, the way of governing, the historical conditions, the formed traditions, and so on.
  And, of course, the theoretical analysis of the topic under discussion will give an opportunity to find out the multifunctional applicability of the parliamentary control institution and the scope of control powers in foreign countries.
 Thus, Articles 50-54 of the Austrian Constitution, adopted on November 10, 1920, refer to parliamentary control.
  The subjects of oversight are the Austrian legislature, the National Council and the Federal Council, each of these two legislatures, and the committees of inquiry set up by the National Assembly [10, p. 59].
  The oversight bodies oversee the government's handling of affairs, ask its members inquiries about all aspects of the executive branch, request the necessary information, and, of course, briefly address brief questions to members of the government during board meetings.
 As we have already noted, the Austrian Constitution has empowered the National Assembly to set up investigative committees.
  And according to that, the courts and other bodies are obliged to satisfy the requirement of those committees to present evidence, the same applies to the public institutions, which provide the necessary documents at the request of the committee.
  In addition, the exercise of advisory control in Austria is directly linked to the formation of a special body, the General Committee, established by Article 55 of the Constitution, which is composed of members of the National Council.
  Federal law may stipulate that decisions of the Federal Minister and the Government must be approved by the General Committee prior to publication.
  The Audit Chamber, which has a constitutional obligation to audit the financial activities of the federation and its communities, is obliged to submit an annual report to the National Council on its activities [11, p. 121].
 35 JURISDICTION The Spanish Constitution, adopted on December 27, 1978, makes parliamentary oversight more comprehensive. Article 101 states that parliamentary oversight may be exercised both over the whole Government and "over each of its members".
  The government as a whole is responsible for the actions of the Council of Ministers [12, Article 101].
 In the parliamentary republics (particularly the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy) and the constitutional monarchies (Great Britain), there is an institution of responsibility before the parliament of the government, which implies the right of the representative body to form a government.
 In Germany, parliamentary control is the responsibility of the Bundestag.
  It manifests itself in the right to elect the federal chancellor, as well as in the initiative to remove him from office.
  The right to approve the budget is also a reliable way to exercise parliamentary control in Germany.
 The German Bundestag also has the right to inspect the financial activities of the executive branch.
  According to Article 114 of the Constitution, the Federal Minister of Finance is obliged to submit a report to the Bundestag on all revenues and expenditures, state status and state debt.
 Parliamentary control in Germany has another feature.
  Special oversight is exercised by the parliamentary oversight group, the budget committee, and the 010 commission (Article 45 of the German Constitution).
  According to the article, the Bundestag means a group that is engaged in a detailed study of the federation's intelligence activities.
 Periodically, the services should provide the parliamentary oversight body with a comprehensive rationale for their activities on any issue of particular interest to the legislature.
 36 JURISDICTION The Italian Constitution (December 22, 1947) stipulates the reservation of parliamentary control over each of the chambers of parliament: the Chamber of Deputies, the Audit Chamber, and the Council of State.
 [12, p. 114] In contrast to the countries in question, the list of forms of parliamentary oversight enacted in the 1976 Constitution of Portugal is clearly defined and separated in Article 162 under the heading "oversight powers".
  The system of forms of parliamentary oversight includes several types, such as: բան Oral or written inquiries of MPs to the Government գնահատ Evaluation of government actions to bring them in line with the Constitution and laws; etc.
 The parliamentarians of Kazakhstan quite often resort to such a form of parliamentary control as the parliamentary inquiry.
  According to the Constitutional Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 2529 of October 16, 1995 "On the Status of the Parliament of the Republic of Kazakhstan and its Deputies", the parliamentary request at the joint and separate sitting of the Parliament on matters within the competence of the body or official.
 The Deputy of the National Assembly has the right to make a request to the Prime Minister and members of the Government, the Chairman of the National Bank, the Chairman and members of the Central Electoral Commission, the Prosecutor General, the Chairman of the National Security Committee, the Chairman and members of the Audit Committee.
 Moreover, the inquiry addressed to the first heads of law enforcement and special state bodies or to the Prosecutor General cannot refer to the issues related to the implementation of criminal prosecution functions.
  The study of inquiries addressed to the Chairman of the National Security Committee is conducted in closed sessions of the parliament or its chambers.
 The parliamentary request may be submitted in writing [Article 13 of the Constitution of the Kingdom of Denmark, in accordance with paragraph 38, obliges the Prime Minister to report at the first session of the Folketing on the general state of affairs and the measures proposed by the Government.
  The mentioned report becomes a subject of general discussion in the parliament.
  In addition, the Danish Folketing has the right to form committees from among the deputies to investigate issues of special importance.
  These commissions have the right to request any written or oral information from both citizens and government agencies [14, p. 65].
 Thus, the theoretical analysis of the institute of Soviet control and the international experience of foreign countries showed that parliamentary control is a necessary condition and an important element of the state legal responsibility of the executive power.
  The development and strengthening of the institution of parliamentary oversight of the government and other governing structures are among the guarantees of the rule of law and democracy.
 .
