One of the most noteworthy attempts to conceptualize the idea of ​​intergenerational justice is the utilitarian approach to one of the most famous philosophical directions of the 19th century.
 Utilitarianism (utilitarianism) as a concept of justice, qualifies the actions of a rational creature as fair when they bring about general satisfaction.
  In more detail, the followers of this current believe that the actions of an individual or a state can be considered just and moral only if the latter leads to an increase in the common good or pleasure and a decrease in suffering.
  This is perhaps only the position of the utilitarians, which has both its strengths and its vulnerabilities, but now we should not focus our attention on it.
 529 PHILOSOPHY Utilitarians argue that the central goal of intergenerational justice is to establish a norm of savings that maximizes utility, which in turn applies to the well-being of both present and future citizens.
  Tremel notes that because what is saved (invested) cannot be consumed at the same time, and because consumption is seen by utilitarians as a pure good, a positive norm of social savings that maximizes both the present and the present. The average utility of future generations should reduce the costs of current generations, including denied consumption, which becomes a negative benefit to the individual, delayed consumption, and opportunity cost. , p. 8687].
 The above should arise in the satisfaction that comes from the present generation as a result of granting privileges to future generations [5, pp. 107-126].
  It is not difficult to guess from what has been said and it is even obvious that according to the utilitarians, taking responsibility for the future generations, providing them with privileges should lead to the satisfaction of the present generations.
 However, it would be wrong to say that the utilitarians' own interpretations of the idea of ​​intergenerational justice are not criticized.
  It is quite true that the utilitarian theory of justice is not mainly concerned with the distribution of welfare among members of society.
  Goseris makes an interesting description on this occasion. "What matters is the size of the welfare 'pie' from which society as a whole will benefit, not the relative size of the pieces that will go to each member of society."
  Therefore, sacrificing the complete well-being of a few people, which makes it possible to maximize the well-being of the society as a whole, may in special circumstances be a policy defended by utilitarians.
  Thus, it is not surprising that 550 PHILOSOPHY criticizes the utilitarian approach because, as many point out, the utilitarian approach to intergenerational justice is more likely to lead to sacrificial, extreme consequences than any other theory of justice.
 Rolls, too, opposes the utilitarian interpretation of intergenerational justice, arguing that classical utilitarianism misleads intergenerational justice, arguing that if we take population size as a variable and assume high marginal productivity of capital, as well as If the time horizon is too far away, then the increase in overall utility can lead to huge accumulation redundancies.
  Utilitarianism in this case may require heavy sacrifices from the worse offspring in favor of those who later have a more prosperous life as a result of all this [6, p. 253].
  Therefore, utilitarianism, according to Rolls, is quite extreme, which should be avoided.
 Speaking of the utilitarian definition of the concept of intergenerational justice, it is necessary to privatize the study of the problem and address the differences between the approaches of average utilitarianism and total utilitarianism.
  According to the average utilitarianism, the utility of the society is equal to the average of the individual utility of its members.
  That is, in this case the complete joy / pleasure of the society is divided according to the number of its members.
  Full utilitarianism, on the other hand, stipulates that the utility of society is equal to the sum of the individual utility of its members.
 It should be borne in mind that these two approaches lead to radically different conclusions regarding possible population policy.
  The preferred moral strategy of the proponents of complete utilitarianism is quite simple. As long as each individual who contributes more than 531 PHILOSOPHIES contributes to the common good, the world's population must continue to grow.
  Even if there were already 500 billion people on earth, a completely utilitarian approach would contribute to further growth, if each growing person considers his life worth living.
  It would be immoral to give birth to people who do not consider their lives worth living [2, pp. 163-171].
  This view, in turn, leads to the so-called Mere Addition Paradox, which the English thinker Derek Parfitt calls the Repugnant Conclusion.
  "For any population of at least ten billion people, all of whom have a very high quality of life, there must be a much larger, imaginary population whose existence, if things were equal, would be better, despite its "The lives of the members are hardly worth living," wrote Parfit [4, p. 388].
  Parfityan Contradictory Conclusion in the field of ethics points out and concretizes a problem known as population ethics [1].
  The conclusion is contradictory, because we intuitively believe that it would be better if there were fewer people, but at a higher level of happiness.
  According to this conclusion, however, the opposite is true. The principle "the more people, the better" works, with one reservation, that is, if people consider their lives worth living for at least a little.
  If we try to look at the issue from a slightly mathematical point of view, we will note that the number of people can increase infinitely, while the happiness or usefulness of each individual can reach asymptotically a very small amount (but not zero), which symbolizes the minimum of survival [7, page 161].
 According to this view, happy people are not the social goal, but happiness itself.
  Summing up, Parfitt notes that of the two ways to increase happiness, from making people happy and to creating a happy person, only the first is good for people, because this is the part of man 532 PHILOSOPHY good or bad for women is.
 Thus, utilitarianism views the issue of intergenerational justice based on common interests, aiming to maximize the welfare of society.
  In this case, naturally, the well-being of the individual is pushed to the background, which gives the liberals the opportunity to disagree with this utilitarian view, which seems to paint a community-oriented (communist) picture.
  The utilitarian current also does not set a clear limit for saving for future generations, thus creating a constant fear of being in an extreme and irreversible situation.
  Turning to the moderate utilitarian and utilitarian approaches, it becomes clear that the utilitarian utopia simply leads to an increasing paradox, according to which the population must continue to grow as long as each growing individual contributes to the common utility or has the lowest utility level.
 .
