Parliamentary control over the police is one of the components of security management.
  Security Administration (SSG) is a relatively new term that has been widely used in both political and legal theory since the late 20th century.
 It expanded the narrow scope of civil-military relations to include the security sector as a whole.
 In particular, police, armed forces, intelligence services, border security, private security companies.
 It should be noted that there is not much research on this topic.
  However, due to the process of democratization of a number of countries, not only has the interest in this topic increased, but also the volume of research on it has increased.
  Thus, the following works deserve special attention in the field of Western legal research, in particular, the report of the Geneva Center for Democratic Oversight of the Armed Forces (DCAF) "Parliamentary Oversight of Security, Principles, Mechanisms and Practices" practices, "Parliamentary role From Asia and Europe ”(The Role of Parliament in Police Governance Lessons Learned from Asia and Europe), by Renate Weber“ Police Organization and Responsibility.
  Comparative study "(Police in organization and accountability. A comparative study), the scientific article" The role of parliamentary oversight in building police integrity in Serbia "(The role of parliamentary oversight in building police integrity in Serbia), Police accountability in the Republic of Armenia OSCE report (Police accountability in the Republic of Armenia) and a number of other studies.
 The preconditions for applying the institution of parliamentary control over the police in the Republic of Armenia were set by the 2020 Police Reform Strategy and the resulting action plan for 2020-2022.
  The urgency of this work comes directly from that program and I think that the opinions and suggestions presented below will contribute to the improvement of that program as well.
 Thus, referring to the concept of parliamentary control, let us mention that it implies transparency of the police activity and increase of the public trust in the latter.
  The role of parliamentary oversight of the police is to verify the implementation of the policy outlined by the parliament in the activities of the police 156 JURISDICTION.
  This function includes the legislator monitoring the fulfillment of police responsibilities through various parliamentary tools.
  Such tools are specialized committees and subcommittees, hearings, the institute of question and answer (interpellation), parliamentary interrogation, parliamentary inquiry, the independent ombudsman overseeing the police, external audit, budget management.
  The International Parliamentary Union uses the following definition of parliamentary oversight: "Review, oversight and oversight of government and public bodies, including the application of policies and legislation" [9, p. 9].
  Parliamentary oversight has a special role in a number of European Union countries as an indicator of high democracy, the rule of law and parliamentarism.
  Referring to the institute of parliamentary control in the Republic of Armenia, it was launched as a result of the constitutional amendments made in 2015.
  In particular, as a result of the changes, the form of government was changed from semi-presidential to parliamentary, which presupposed the formation of the institution of parliamentary control.
  As a result, the police, which before the constitutional changes was a body attached to the government, was transformed into a body subordinate to the prime minister after the changes.
  The mentioned change was fixed by the RA Prime Minister's decision No. 751-L of June 11, 2018, according to which the Police of the Republic of Armenia is a body subordinate to the Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia [3].
  In fact, from now on the police in Armenia is accountable only to the Prime Minister.
  In such conditions, the police seemed to be left out of the parliamentary control process.
  Moreover, there is no separate institution of parliamentary control over the police in Armenia, there are no laws regulating the sphere, by-laws, proper tools.
  Meanwhile, studying the experience of some countries in Europe 157 JURISDICTION, it can be assumed that the lack of such a rule in the RA legislative system may lead to the inadequacy of the law enforcement and regulatory systems of the institution of parliamentary oversight.
  It is noteworthy that even in developed countries there are no uniform legal acts regulating this field and tools to ensure control.
  Moreover, different European countries have adopted different formats for resolving the issue, based on the form of government, the status of the police and other factors.
  The legal experience of these countries shows that the legal acts regulating the control of the executive bodies over the police clearly record the scope of the participants, the terms, sequence and results of the control measures.
  Meanwhile, the parliamentary control system does not have such clarity.
  In order to analyze the role of the parliament in relation to the police in the constitutional context, it is necessary to start with the study of the constitutional structure of the country, the existing structural relations between the institutions and the powers given to them.
  The study of international experience shows that the role of parliamentary committees is key in the process of exercising parliamentary control.
  The powers of parliamentary committees are set out in legislation, standing rules of parliament and sometimes even in the constitution.
 Thus, parliamentary control in the Republic of Armenia is regulated by Articles 106-108 of the Constitution.
  According to the provisions of the mentioned articles of the RA Constitution, the legislator referred to the standing, temporary and investigative committees of the National Assembly and defined the requirements for their establishment.
  In particular, according to Article 106, Part 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, “The National Assembly establishes standing committees for making preliminary drafts of laws, other issues within its competence and concluding conclusions on them, as well as for exercising parliamentary control.
  No more than twelve standing committees may be established in the National Assembly.
  (...) ».
  According to Article 107 of the RA Constitution, "Ad-hoc committees may be established by the decision of the National Assembly to discuss separate laws, draft decisions, statements and messages of the National Assembly, as well as issues related to parliamentary ethics and submit conclusions on them to the National Assembly." Article 1 մաս 1 stipulates that "at the request of at least a quarter of the total number of Deputies, a National Assembly Commission of Inquiry shall be established by law in order to find out the facts concerning issues within the competence of the National Assembly and of public interest." [4] .
 Parliamentary powers in the field of security management According to a report by the Geneva Center for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces, the parliamentary committee performs various oversight functions, but all of them are based on obtaining information from parliament and requesting documents and reports or commenting on executive actions. has the authority to convene meetings organized by the commissions for substantiation.
  The above-mentioned functions are divided into two groups according to their different, but complementary control strategies, ie. 1. Active, in which case the commissions are involved in the patrol activities of the police (together with the supervised body), which has a regular nature and is planned in advance. Regular meetings to discuss the latest developments in legislation or policy, regular reports on the activities of the executive bodies, which are submitted to the commission, visits of the commission to troops, military and civilian institutions and offices, etc.
  This type of control is based on a preventive approach.
  At that time, the commission sometimes shares the responsibility for its revised changes.
 2. Reactive, in which case the committees start acting only after receiving a "fire alarm", organizing hearings or interrogations to investigate the actions and complaints received during the parliamentary debates or in the media.
  Commissions are authorized to summon ministers, military or civil servants, chairmen of executive bodies, or independent experts to a meeting to answer the commission's questions and even to take a sworn testimony from them, as is done in court.
  Committees may also instruct responsible bodies, such as the National Audit Office, to conduct financial audits of budget execution.
 It should be noted that obtaining information on the budget of both the EU countries and the RA Police is a more complicated process than in the case of other state bodies.
  This is due to the fact that the principle of confidentiality is applied to the police budget, which limits the receipt of basic information about it.
  However, it is necessary to distinguish between the concepts of "protection of privacy" and "lack of public control".
  To address this controversy, many European countries have adopted laws clarifying the procedures for providing classified information to specialized committees.
  At the same time, in the countries of the European Union, there are two main ways of providing confidential information to parliamentarians.
  Thus, in countries such as the Federal Republic of Germany, the Republics of France, Poland, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Bulgaria and Romania, parliamentarians are entitled to 160 JURISDICTIONS without obtaining confidential information.
  In a number of European Union countries, such as Norway, Serbia, Macedonia, Latvia, and in parliaments, members of the Commission can obtain confidential information only after obtaining appropriate permission from a governmental body after passing several general inspections.
 Studying the experience of the German Federation, it should be noted that the German parliaments do not have a clear task to study the effectiveness of the police.
  Nevertheless, that right is reserved for them by law.
  Traditionally, it is carried out through parliamentary committees, which oversee the activities of the police, as well as perform other functions subordinated to the internal affairs.
  These parliamentary commissions have a separate budget, which allows them to include in their work university students carrying out external expertise to check the current state of the police, to raise the existing problems.
 It is noteworthy that the organization of police activities in the Federal Republic of Germany, appointments to senior positions, as well as other priority types of police activities are the functions of the government.
  Nevertheless, the parliament has the right to be informed about the government's decisions and to discuss them.
  This is done through parliamentary committees investigating internal affairs.
  The parliament can also conduct a special investigation against the police if it finds that there are legal errors in the activities of the police.
  Article 43 of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Germany stipulates that the federal parliament has the right to convene members of the federal government.
  In practice, parliamentary committees regularly call on the government to invite high-ranking police officials to parliament to answer questions from members of parliament.
  As a rule, these invitations are made after political demonstrations or mistakes in the work of the police.
  In such cases, although the government generally responds positively to the parliament's proposal, even in the opposite case, members of parliament are legally obliged to compel police officers to respond to their inquiries.
 Following the example of the Institute of Parliamentary Inquiry in the Federal Republic of Germany, comparing the Institute of Parliamentary Inquiry in the Republic of Armenia, it should be noted that the 2015 amendments to the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia and the RA Constitutional Law "Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly" regulated this institution.
  In particular, significant differences were envisaged both in terms of the scope of entities eligible to apply, the procedure and deadlines for discussion, and the legal consequences.
  The above-mentioned new legal regulations, in contrast to the previous legislation, provide for other deadlines for the government to respond.
  If previously it was 20 days, according to the envisaged procedure, the members of the government respond to the inquiry no later than 30 days after receiving it.
  The answers to the inquiries are presented at the NA sitting and posted on the official website of the NA [10, page 98].
  The police, however, not being a body subordinate to the government, is outside the scope of regulation of the above-mentioned institution.
 Referring again to the Institute of Police Oversight in Germany, it should be noted that Germany also has an established audit institute, which conducts audits not only for the legal compliance of budget expenditures, but also for the effectiveness of public administration.
  Audit institutes are constitutionally independent.
  Despite these regulations, Germany is considered to have a weak tradition of independent police oversight, in contrast to Europe 162 JURISDICTION There are other countries that oversee special police ombudsmen and citizen oversight committees.
  However, it should be noted that in recent years, independent ombudsmen with special police oversight have been operating in three states of the German Federation.
 In particular, in the Rhineland-Palatinate since 2014, in Schleswig-Holstein and Baden-Württemberg since 2016. [8]
 Referring to the parliamentary control over the police in another European country, the Kingdom of Belgium, it should be noted the following: The Belgian Federal Parliament has a bicameral system.
  It consists of the House of Representatives and the Senate.
 Belgium has had a coordinated police service since 2001, with two structural levels.
  That is, 195 local police services and 1 federal police service.
  The mayor and the prosecutor are responsible for the local police, and the Ministries of the Interior and Justice are responsible for the federal police.
  Each member of the Federal Parliament has the right to ask questions about police actions, both to the local and federal police.
  To answer these questions, the Ministers of Interior and / or Justice consult with the Technical and Administrative Secretariat.
  These secretariats consist of both federal and local police officers, who in turn provide the liaison mechanism between the police and the internal affairs, justice cabinets.
  There are two committees within the House of Representatives of the Belgian Parliament, which deal with police issues.
  These are the Standing Committee on Internal Affairs and the Special Committee, which is especially engaged in police oversight.
  In addition, the Federal Parliament has the power to set up committees of inquiry to deal with specific matters relating to the activities of the police 163 JURISDICTION.
  As for the Standing Committee on Internal Affairs, it is not limited to police issues, but also deals with all types of internal affairs (such as civil defense issues).
  This implies that all the proposals put forward by the member of the parliament and the bills put forward by the government are presented, discussed, if necessary, amended and voted by the members of the commission.
  The report of the discussions and the text adopted by the committee are submitted to the plenary session.
  Like other committees, the Standing Committee on Home Affairs has the power to oversee ministers (Article 11 of the Belgian Constitution), as they are responsible for the relevant departments.
  Monitoring can be done through hearings and inquiries (written, oral).
  The commission may invite members of the police to clarify and comment on the issues raised.
  It should be noted that the commission consists of 17 members.
  Moreover, the largest political party has the largest representation in this standing committee.
 The oversight function of the Belgian parliament also presupposes oversight of police policy and budget.
  It is noteworthy that only the content of the National Security Program is reported to the Legislature, so Members of Parliament, however, cannot approve or reject a strategic police policy plan.
  The parliament cannot fully exercise its right to control such an important document as, for example, the four-year police security strategy program.
  It is limited to the general discussion of the program and does not give clear assessments or other suggestions.
 It is noteworthy that in some European parliaments, in addition to committees, there is a subcommittee 164 JURISDICTION institute, which aims to narrowly divide the work of committees with a wide range of powers.
  The commission is subdivided into subcommittees according to an operational approach to a specific bill, examination or hearing, or an institutional approach to overseeing a specific institution or body.
  Subcommittees may also be set up to coordinate the work of several key committees working on specific issues.
 To describe the relationship between the Belgian police, independent oversight bodies and civilian oversight, the Federal Ombudsman's Office, The Standing Police Monitoring Committee ((Committee P)), the Federal and Local Police Prosecutor's Office, should also be noted. oversight, internal oversight service, and commissions of inquiry.
 For comparison, it should be noted that in the Republic of Armenia, the above-mentioned control institutions have prosecutorial control over the police and the Internal Control Service in the person of the Internal Security Department of the RA Police.
 Thus, studying the international experience, it can be concluded that in the process of control over the police, the parliament performs three main functions of governance. 1. Legislative (legislative, exemplary), which includes: analysis of the legal basis related to the police, adoption and amendment of laws related to the police, permission to use special measures during the state of emergency, riots, definition of the rights and responsibilities of the police, etc.
 2. Oversight, which includes the regular performance of oversight activities in the field of security, including 165 JURISDICTION hearings, inspections, visits, as well as the performance of special oversight functions, including parliamentary inquiries.
 3. Budget management, which involves reviewing police budget execution proposals, detailed and comprehensive study of police expenditures, review of costly programs and procurement.
 At the same time, it should be noted that most of the forms of parliamentary control over the police are not imperative (they are not imperative), but only suggestions to take certain actions.
  Nevertheless, parliamentary oversight plays an important role in increasing the efficiency of the police, ensuring transparency, and protecting human rights.
 Summing up the above, I think that in order to increase the efficiency of the police activity in the Republic of Armenia, it is necessary. 1. Introduce the institution of parliamentary oversight of the police, 2. Make a status change of the police body, reshape the police from the body under the Prime Minister, based on the positive experience of EU countries, 3. Apply new tools of parliamentary oversight, in addition to domestic legislation, 4. As needed Apply the institute of ombudsman for police affairs, 5. Introduce the institute of external audit based on the positive experience of the Federal Republic of Germany, 6. Take other necessary and effective measures to apply and adapt the positive experience of the EU countries towards the RA police.
 .
