It is known that the Armenian medieval scientific thought was thoroughly generated in the writings of church figures.
  Scholars, bishops and religious leaders, in the absence of the state, also carried on their shoulders the honorable and responsible work of education and enlightenment.
  The grateful ones who came out of the spiritual bosom of the Church created, created and guided the main tendencies of different spheres of public life, anchoring the collective of the divided people.
  3 JURISDICTION of medieval Armenian legal-political thought One of such great representatives was the theologian, jurist Mkhitar Gosh [3, pp. 732-736].
  He lived and carried out law-making activities in stateless times, when the military and diplomatic efforts of the Armenian princes and the clergy tried to ensure their independence as much as possible.
  The Nor Getik monastery complex [5, p. 154], founded by Gosh, being a unique national school, served for the spiritual renewal of the Enlightenment thought of the century.
  Although Gosh's creative life is multifaceted, in this scientific article we are especially interested in his legal and political views, his perception of divine law, which are mainly summarized in his monumental Codex.
  The latter, as one of the unique monuments of Armenian law, with its content structure, with bold solutions did not lose its relevance for many centuries, being implemented in the domestic legislation of other states.
 Suffice it to say that Gosh's judgment book, having no state sponsorship due to the simple absence of a state, was used not only in Armenia itself, but also in Cilician Armenia, the Armenian colonies of Poland, Crimea, Georgia, and Russia [1, p. 19].
  But first of all, the Court Book was a legal act written during the years of the absence of the Armenian statehood, aimed at the regulation of various public relations.
 Gosh attributes the urgency and urgency of sending the court book for a number of reasons.
  First, the court book was called to neutralize the insults addressed to the Armenians, according to which the Armenians do not have a judicial system and legislation.
  This also solves the problem of refraining from foreign legal sources and justice bodies and not being dependent.
  In addition, it is very important to regulate people's behavior, to bring ingrained customs to legal certainty, which has disrupted public life due to people's ignorance and ignorance.
 The Scriptural precepts, which certainly govern human behavior as if fulfilling the 4 JURISDICTIONS of delivering the Constitution, do not effectively curb the lawlessness of the people, do not provide a stable rule of law, and therefore need proper privatization and interpretation as life goes on and requires adequate legal solutions.
  While writing the court book, the author was not guided by the obsession to see it perfectly, but modestly admitted that it can be revised and revised, which certainly stems from the need to keep pace with the spirit of the time.
 Gosh's legal-political teaching is natural in nature, where the theological direction is of fundamental importance.
  According to Gosh, equality of people is equality first of all before God and then before the law, although some reservations and class approaches are noticeable in this issue, especially in the relationship between master and servant, in the case of criminal Muslims and other cases related to religion.
  Equality before God gives birth to social inequality by virtue of the socio-economic conditions of public life.
  God created man of his own free will, free to control his own destiny.
  But man is not only unconditionally subject to divine laws, but also to positive laws, in other words, a positive right established by the state.
  The latter is man-made, changeable, while natural law is eternal and permanent.
 Gosh is a supporter of the powerful royal power, which is able to unite the fragmented fragments of the future state.
  But that authority has its limitations, since it is God-given in nature.
  It is not difficult to notice the influence of the theological thought of the time on the formation of Gosh's legal-political views, especially when it comes to the theological essence of state power and the state in general.
  This approach, as well as the subordination of individual interests to national issues, was aimed at strengthening the country's internal solidarity and stability.
  A centrifugal state needs state institutions and a legal system through which the manifestations of anarchy will be neutralized.
  The atmosphere of state justice depends on the effective operation of the legal system and justice.
  In this sense, the indelible principle of criminal law and the rule of law in general, the principle of legality, is put forward in the court book.
  An act not defined by law cannot be considered a crime.
  Moreover, Goshi is well acquainted with the features of the subjective side: the crimes committed "knowingly" and "unknowingly", the necessary protection, the individualization of the sentence, the independence of the judge, etc.
  In this sense, punishment as a measure of responsibility should be based first of all on correcting a criminal with a religious upbringing, and not on a means of revenge against him.
  It is noteworthy that the role of the church is important in correcting the offender.
 The legacy of royal power is expressed in the traditional "father to son" order, but Gosh preferred the most worthy in the case of several sons, although at the same time does not rule out the possibility of the king's brother as a candidate for the throne, which of course was a direct influence of current realities on Gosh. .
 In particular, it was about the succession of the Zakaryan brothers, with whom Gosh had high hopes.
 It is noteworthy that in the Book of Judgment, marital relations are also endowed with features characteristic of divine law.
  According to Gosh, marriage is a divine institution, a voluntary union of man and woman.
  The obligatory condition of marriage was the consent of the couple and their parents, kinship distance (up to the fourth degree), homosexuality, celibacy, defined age (14 for men, 12 for women).
  As for the engagement, although it was not obligatory, but after it was carried out, it had legal consequences.
 Theological approaches do not completely prevent Gosh from clearly distinguishing between secular and spiritual authorities [2, 6 JURISDICTION p. 341].
  The church must be engaged in spiritual affairs and not interfere in the exercise of state power and vice versa.
  We do not consider it superfluous to quote Gosh's position on the state-church relations, in which the secular legalist's secular understanding of the concept of a secular state is completed. "The bishop should not interfere in worldly affairs, but should be engaged in church affairs.
  Political power must be secular, and its bearer must be the state.
  The spiritual lesson must be independent.
  He must closely cooperate with the authorities for the sake of the homeland and the welfare of the people. "
 Moreover, the separation of church and state functions does not mean that the church is an island structure in the state.
  On the contrary, their complementary ties to the most important issues of the state and society, such as the obligatory guarantee and consent of the Armenian Patriarch for the election of the heir to the throne, are obvious.
  Similarly, the issue of the monarch's resignation and responsibility does not bypass the will of the church leader.
  Moreover, the latter is in no way constrained to sit at the royal table at any time, whereas the patriarchal privilege is not reserved for the king to sit on the throne.
 This delimitation also applies to ecclesiastical law and state law, both of which are based on divine law.
  The church rule heals the soul and the law heals the body.
  Although the difference in working style, in the end both serve the same purpose, that is, the refinement of human behavior.
  Gosh singles out violations of a religious nature - sins that fall within the jurisdiction of a clerical court and are usually punished by repentance, such as fornication or homosexuality.
  Meanwhile, the offenses that are not considered a sin are subject to the jurisdiction of the secular government and are punished up to imprisonment, and in exceptional cases also the death penalty.
  If the act is both at the same time, then the punishment is applied in combination with the secular and spiritual authorities.
  Such is the case with blasphemy, which carries the death penalty.
  In addition to ecclesiastical and religious offenses, the scope of jurisprudence of the Theological Court also included marital and inheritance disputes.
  In any case, no matter how noticeable the functional separation of religious and state institutions is in Gosh, the eminent scholar nevertheless imposes some legal restrictions on doctrinal issues.
  Thus, married couples were required to practice the same religion; in some cases, being a Christian was considered a mitigating circumstance, and the testimony of a non-believer was considered "illegal."
  And this was natural, because being quite progressive, Gosh could not measure the world with modern ideas, and perhaps we do not have the right to blame him for that.
 Mkhitar Gosh also attaches great importance to the national title of the church, not hiding the fact that the frequently escalating religious issues are conditioned by clear political motives, and therefore the church must be independent of sectarian influences and fermentations, especially when it comes to uniting with the Chalcedonian churches.
  In other words, each state must respect the right of others to choose their own path of development of their own country, whatever it may be.
  Mutual respect and tolerance in national-religious issues once again underline Gosh's progressive aspirations [4, pp. 78-82].
  As for the ethnic clashes, from this point of view Gosh is only the advocate and defender of a just war, that is, of the struggle for the independence of his own state.
 Thus, it is clear that Mkhitar Gosh attaches considerable importance to the divine norms, considering them the basis of the rule of law.
  However, Gosh, well ahead of his time, also raises the issue of the future state and the national church, which bears the burden of the Armenian identity in that period, each in the sphere of its functions.
  In fact, Gosh was already legally consolidating the secular state, while the idea received flesh and blood only in Western Europe during the Renaissance and the Enlightenment.
 .
