The introduction of programs aimed at raising the quality and prestige of education in the rural communities of the Republic of Armenia, the preservation of national traditions, the provision of access to education throughout life are priority issues.
 The most effective use of natural potential in the country and its separate regions, the formation of the agrarian market, the development and implementation of investment, credit and financial policies are necessary preconditions for the development of rural communities.
  Therefore, the education policy in the regions should be aimed at the formation of learners' agro-knowledge, skills, abilities and relevant competencies.
 Applying the necessary strategies and clarified approaches, which will be aimed at living in the native village, will enable the learners to preserve the national traditions, to be engaged in agricultural work, to provide pre-professional orientation.
 Rural life in the country is associated with a low level of socio-cultural and economic development, it is considered an unprofitable and unpromising occupation, as a result of which rural youth do not want to return, live and work in the village.
  As a result, emigration from the homeland and depopulation of villages increase, land degradation, and the species composition of agricultural crops decreases.
 118 At present, all schools in Armenia implement the same general education program, as a result of which rural students do not receive the competencies to fully organize their daily rural life [3].
  The population in the villages is guided by the agricultural knowledge traditionally passed down from generation to generation, as a result of which modern agricultural approaches and technologies are not introduced, the green economy does not develop, and the communities do not get high-quality, "organic" crops.
 Rural communities are far from economic and cultural centers, due to which an autonomous and closed system of life is formed, the scope of social relations is narrowed, the villager is alienated from modern technologies, modern methods of management, culture [8].
 The testing of the agribusiness school model in rural areas will enable the implementation of an agribusiness program in the schools of rural communities of Armenia, based on the socio-economic situation of the communities, socio-ethno-cultural requirements, agro-climatic conditions of the region.
 The aim of the research was to create an agrarian education model, which together with general education will implement a continuous program of agricultural education and will serve as a platform for the introduction and dissemination of agricultural innovations.
 The agribusiness educational model is aimed at providing an educational and cultural environment in the rural community that will make the school graduate a business and competitive member of society.
 As a result of the introduction of agribusiness programs, the learner will be able to create goods and live well on the native land, maintain the moral and psychological foundations of a member of the rural community, easily find his place in the modern information world.
 The model of the agro-school will be part of the social-pedagogical, socio-cultural system, which will ensure the complete and comprehensive development of the school students and the youth of the community, the socio-cultural life of the village and will contribute to the development of communities and income generation [7; 2].
  Learners will be proactive individuals, ready for 119 creative and research activities and will form not only a decision-maker, but also an active, participatory citizen.
 Achieving the above-mentioned goals requires the creation of an appropriate educational model, the reform of the main activities of the pedagogical community, the activation of students' efforts, the involvement of parents in the educational process, the use of the potential of the educational environment and resources.
 The research was aimed at the "Education for Sustainable Development" process, the key topics of which are "Rural Development", "Sustainable Production and Sustainable Consumption" (UNECE, 2005).
 The urgency of the study is also conditioned by the 17 Sustainable Development Goals included in the UN Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 [12].
 The introduction of the "Open Agrarian School" model in the rural communities of Armenia will contribute to the provision of non-formal education of parents and students, the agrarian, socio-cultural development of rural communities.
 The Open Agrarian School, as a center for civic initiatives, civic education for children and adults, helps the villagers to form rural groups to solve the village's economic, environmental, charitable, educational and other problems.
  In such groups, both children and adults work together, which allows them to communicate in informal situations, to learn from each other and to teach each other.
  Children learn to do charitable work, from helping families who need it in a variety of activities to participating in community work [1; 5; 10].
 Material resources and methods The resources of the Open Agrarian School are the school, teachers, students, alumni, parents, the community, partner organizations, philanthropists, and alternative pilot projects.
 The methods are: implementation of new educational technologies, testing of types and innovative technologies appropriate to the given area, introduction of methods of professional orientation and pre-professional education within agrarian professions, methods of formation of skills and values: a) strengthening community-school connection, b) school-student - Teacher, student-student, parent-teacher employment relations.
 The school, with its head and teaching staff, organizes the effective cooperation of these components.
  The school becomes an example of an organization whose activities are open to the general public and society (Figure 1).
 The school also has different components: classrooms, library, canteen, workshops, laboratories, agro-experimental center, multifunctional hall, gym and sports ground.
 (Figure 2).
  Each of the components is important and can vary depending on the climatic conditions of the area, the priority tasks facing the community, and other factors [6; 7; 8].
 121 Classrooms should be suitable for individual and group learning, adapted to the use of modern ICT tools.
 The canteen should be not only a place to eat, but also an educational laboratory, where children will collect recipes for traditional meals, learn to prepare, serve, experiment.
 School students and community members will have access to information in the library.
  The library, connected to the Internet by computers, will give each resident the opportunity to look for the answers to the questions he is interested in, to get acquainted with the world news.
 The agro-experimental center is the most important component of the "open agrarian school", where all children will learn to work together with community members and apply what they have learned at work.
 The agro-experimental center, depending on the region and adaptation for certain species, will include an orchard, arable land, a department for collecting and processing herbs, a flower garden, a beekeeping department, a livestock farm, and a greenhouse.
  Each of the students can spend part of their educational time in this center, getting acquainted with the cultural traditions of the country, the cuisine, the 122 food products produced, etc.
  Here they will also learn to organize the work of others, to analyze the work of the center, to find its strengths and weaknesses, to make suggestions as a result of the analysis.
 This is where the farmer, the future manager of rural affairs, is formed.
 The multifunctional hall, in addition to the needs of the school, will serve the members of the community.
  Various gatherings, lectures, movie screenings, concerts and other events will be organized here.
 The gym and sports ground will serve students and other members of the community as a place for training for health, sports and sports groups.
 In order to implement the mission and concept of the Open Agrarian School, it is necessary to take the following steps: մշակ Develop and implement an alternative experimental agrarian education program in parallel with the general education program, which can be effectively implemented in schools in other regions of Armenia in the future.
  Create a model of a rural school - an agrarian school [1].
 ։ To ensure the effective operation of the agrarian experimental innovation platform, which will allow to spread the obtained results and experience in other communities as well.
 ։ To provide students with high results defined by the state standards of general education, sufficient and stable knowledge and skills in the field of agriculture that they acquire, which are necessary for every rural citizen to engage in agricultural activities in accordance with modern requirements [14].
  Develop skills for planning and implementing collaborative work in the community, which is an important precondition for ensuring intra-community cooperation and building a sustainable rural community [3].
 ։ Knowledge and application of modern ICT technologies to obtain, process new information, study international experience and establish inter-community connections [4].
 ։ Strengthening school-community cooperation that strengthens parent-son bonds.
 ։ Professional development of the pedagogical staff as a result of training courses, study of the experience and cooperation of local and international educational institutions (including in the field of agrarian education) and organizations.
 In order to organize the work properly, it is necessary to clarify the goals, means and functions of the spheres.
 123 Actions and Outcomes In order to achieve the expected results it is necessary to take certain actions (Table 1) Action Expected Outcome Alternative Agriculture Availability of all educational resources in the secondary school Development of the school: syllabus, methodological guidelines, development of tools, development of modules, modules machines, technical base Seeds, planting material base, creation, modern Drip irrigation system, with technologies Greenhouse, cattle farm, equipment for beekeeping, rabbit farming Real knowledgeOrganization of Adapted and Localized Rural Practices in the Organization of the Countries Likes: Organizing Mutual Visits Pedagogical Training Training of Existing Staff of Agro-Education Lessons According to the Curriculum of the Agricultural and Practical Exercises the model of the agrarian school.
 As a result of the experiment, students will develop professional and entrepreneurial competencies in the field of agriculture, self-orientation in the labor market, ability to develop and implement new projects, aspiration to implement new social initiatives [9; 11], which will increase their competitiveness in the labor market [5; 10].
  Willingness to pursue education throughout life, to ensure professional and personal growth, responsibility and desire to live, study, be guided by national customs, to create and make it more prosperous, to prepare students to choose a future profession as a result of vocational orientation trainings.
 The involvement of parents and other members of the community in agricultural activities, as well as the application of innovative agricultural approaches implemented at school, the demonstration of positive results and the dissemination of experience are crucial for the effective implementation of the experiment.
  Eventually the students will be directed to the most important and economically profitable field in the given region.
 .
