LEGAL SETTLEMENT OF THE LOAN AGREEMENT BY RA LEGISLATION It is impossible to imagine the development of civil-legal relations without financial or other material assistance, as there is a constant need to transfer money or property from one subject of civil relations to another.
  These relations are regulated by the provisions of the loan agreement provided for in the Civil Code.
  The meaning of the loan agreement is that one party (the lender) transfers to the other party (the borrower) other property determined by the will, and the borrower undertakes to return the same amount of money (the loan amount) to the lender in the same amount and quality as the property received from the lender. property.
The obligation arising from the contract is strictly one-sided, as the lender acquires only the right of claim, and the borrower assumes the obligation to repay the debt.
  As a rule, the loan is repayable.
 The law stipulates that the lender has the right to receive interest on the loan amount from the borrower, unless otherwise provided by the loan agreement.
  According to the Civil Code, the loan agreement presupposes interest-free, unless otherwise provided, if the agreement is concluded between citizens for an amount not exceeding fifty times the minimum wage, it is not related to any of the parties' business activities. other property.
  The loan agreement has certain features that distinguish it from other civil transactions.
  First of all, the subject of the loan agreement is the money or the items determined by the type characteristics, the use of which is possible only through sale 1.
 Therefore, the borrower can not be obliged to return the same money or property as in the case of gratuitous use of the property, lease or other transactions.
  The property or money considered to be the subject of the contract becomes his property from the moment of transfer to the borrower, as he must be able to dispose of the received property.
  Under the contract of gratuitous use of real estate, the property is transferred not with the right of ownership, but with the right of use and possession.
  Borrowing from a contract for free use of property differs in other features as well.
 The mentioned contract is concluded only by gratuitous agreement, and in exchange 1 See Braginsky M., Vitrinsky V., Contract Law, book. 5, t. 1, Agreements on loan, bank loans ifactoring. Agreements, made on the creation of collective education, Moscow, 2006, p. 45.
It can be both gratuitous and rewarding.
  The contract of gratuitous use of the property is concluded only in the interests of the user, in case the loan is beneficial for both parties.
 The risk of accidental loss or damage of property falls on the borrower, as its owner, and in case of gratuitous use, on the gratuitous provider, the owner1.
  At the same time, the gratuitous user of the property may be obliged to compensate for the damage to the property, while in the case of a loan agreement, the obligation is strictly one-sided.
The loan is classified as a real contract.
 It is considered sealed from the moment of its delivery, determined by AMD or by type 2.
 In the case of a written agreement of the borrower։ the lender, by which the latter assumes the responsibility to provide the borrower with money or his property determined by type of characteristics, he does not have the obligation to perform the given actions, as the contract itself cannot be considered concluded until the actual payment.
  That is, the contract signed between the parties cannot have legal force until the money or the property is transferred.
  However, in some cases the prior agreement of the parties may have legal force.
 It is about a preliminary contract, the conclusion of which is not prohibited by civil law.
 However, the preliminary agreement does not oblige the parties to transfer the money or the property, but envisages the obligation of the party to conclude the conditional loan agreement within the terms stipulated in the preliminary agreement3.
  It should be noted that the contract is considered concluded from the moment of transferring the money, that is, if the specific term, the order and conditions of providing the money are determined by the pre-agreement, the parties will undertake to sign it with the terms of the preliminary agreement.
  According to Article 445 of the RA Civil Code. "Under the preliminary contract, the parties are obliged to sign a contract on the transfer of property, work or services in the future under the conditions stipulated in the preliminary contract."
 In case the party who signed the preliminary contract avoids concluding the main contract, the other party has the right to apply to the court with the demand to conclude it compulsorily.
  The concept assumes that the conclusion of a preliminary contract is typical only for consensual transactions.
 However, the legal force of the preliminary contract may be extended to the loan agreement.
  In particular, if we oblige the parties to sign a contract in advance, this will imply that the party will be obliged to transfer the money or property, because the loan will be considered concluded from the moment of transferring the subject of the contract.
  That is, if the preliminary contract provides all the specific essential conditions necessary for the conclusion of the main contract, then we can oblige the party to sign the loan agreement.
 However, although the loan agreement is considered real, we think, taking into account the tendencies of the development of civil law relations իր the fact that very often in practice the parties 1 See "Civil Law", textbook, p. II, half volume 2, in order. E. Суханова, Москва, 2000, Page 204.
2 See "RA Civil Law", part 2, 2nd edition, edited by S. Meghryan, Yerevan, 2009, p. 399.
3 See Braginski M., Vitryansky V., p. 49.
We agree in advance on the provision of money, perform certain actions, we believe that the Civil Code should allow the parties to choose the way of concluding the contract.
  Accordingly, they will be able to decide whether to sign a contract in advance, in which case they will anticipate all the essential conditions related to the provision and return of the money (concluding a consensual deal) or from the moment the contract is transferred.
  In the first case, the borrower will have a guarantee, which will definitely receive the amount or property on which an agreement has been reached;
  In this case, the procedure for challenging the loan agreement will be easier, ie each of the parties will be able to prove the conclusion of the agreement.
  In the case of a contractual nature, the timing of the transfer of money and the receipt of the receipt do not coincide, so it would be entirely justified to give the loan agreement a consensual nature and allow the parties to decide on their own.
 Accordingly, Article 877 can be worded as follows: "The loan agreement is considered concluded from the moment of transferring money or other property, unless otherwise provided by the agreement."
One consideration related to the horse of the contract. The first part of Article 295 of the RA Civil Code stipulates that a transaction, the law of which or by agreement of the parties does not define a written (ordinary or notarized) form, may be concluded orally.
 It follows from the analysis of the norm that the law does not allow the contract to be concluded orally, if the law clearly stipulates the requirement to keep the written form.
  RA city. According to Article 878 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the loan agreement is concluded in writing.
 This legislative wording is imperative, it does not allow the parties to reach an oral agreement.
  That is, in this case he can not use the mouse. Article 297 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, according to which transactions exceeding twenty times the minimum amount of the minimum wage between citizens must be concluded by ordinary written form.
 However, given the validity and applicability of the loan agreement, it should be noted that the maintenance of a written horse is sometimes unrealistic, և the parties, in fact, do not formulate their agreement properly, which leads to unfavorable consequences.
  Later they can not prove the fact that the contract was signed1.
  If the written agreement is not kept, the lender will not have the right to demand the return of the amount from the borrower, because when there is no contract with a proper agreement, there is no obligation to be fulfilled by the borrower.
 It is supposed that the loan amount was not even transferred, as it should have happened at the time of signing the contract.
  RA city. According to Article 878 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. "The loan agreement is signed in writing.
 Failure to keep the specified horse will result in the transaction being invalidated.
 Such an agreement is null and void. ”
 By saying nothing, we understand that it contradicts the law from the beginning, it is declared invalid by the force of law.
In fact, if the parties do not comply with the written requirements, the contract will be considered unsigned, ie the agreement is not fulfilled.
  Failure to comply with the written form of the loan agreement may not be challenged in any way.
  The parties do not have the opportunity as 1 See Braginsky M., Vitryansky V., p. 94.
Present both oral testimony of witnesses and written evidence.
 Taking all this into account, we suggest allowing the parties to conclude the loan agreement orally.
  When concluding verbal transactions, legal will is given to the will expressed by actions or silence 1, that is, the performance of a certain action (transfer of money) will be enough for concluding a loan agreement.
  City. According to Part 2 of Article 295 of the Criminal Code. "All transactions made at the time of conclusion may be concluded orally, except for those transactions for which a notarial deed is established, for transactions whose mere non-observance of a written deed leads to their invalidity, unless otherwise agreed by the non-parties."
  If we do not oblige the parties to conclude the agreement in writing in the article regulating the "loan", then we can refer to this norm տալ to give the parties the opportunity to conclude their agreement orally.
  In addition to expressing a will, in order to sign an oral contract, you will need an expression of will, which is expressed by performing certain actions.
  The opportunity to express one's will through legal actions is envisaged. According to Article 294 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, a transaction that can be concluded orally is considered concluded when the person's will to conclude a transaction is in doubt.
  The actual transfer of money can be considered as an expression of will.
However, not all loan agreements can be concluded orally, ie it is possible to set a maximum amount of money և to allow the parties to conclude the agreement orally in case of a loan exceeding the given limit.
 We can take as a basis the provision envisaged by the Civil Code, according to which in case of an amount exceeding fifty times the loan is concluded without interest.
  In other words, the law stipulates a certain limit of permissibility, which can be accepted as a criterion, according to which the rules of the oral contract will be applied to the concluded contract, unless the law or the contract does not provide for the written conclusion.
 Legislative wording can look like this: "Except in cases provided by law, loan agreements shall be concluded in writing: • concluded between individuals or legal entities, • the amount of which exceeds fifty times the minimum wage."
It should be noted that According to Article 878 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, failure to keep a written record leads to the invalidity of the loan agreement.
 Such an agreement is null and void.
  The article gives rise to controversy.
  The null and void transaction is that it is invalid from the beginning, it is recognized as contrary to the law և, in fact, it cannot give rise to rights and obligations.
  According to Article 298 of the Civil Code. "Failure to keep the written form of the transaction in the event of a dispute deprives the parties of confirmation of the transaction and its terms, citing witness testimony, but does not deprive them of the right to provide other written evidence."
 The point is that the mentioned article is applicable in case of controversial transactions, and in case of nullity no evidence can be presented, as in that case the transaction is initially considered to be against the law.
 A void transaction, regardless of the existence of a dispute, is considered invalid. Անվ 1 See "RA Civil Law", part 1, 3rd edition, edited by T. Barseghyan, Yerevan, 2009, p. 211.
In no case can its conclusion be substantiated by any evidence.
 Article 305 of the Civil Code, according to which a transaction that does not comply with the requirements of law or other legal acts is invalid, unless the law stipulates that such a transaction is void, or does not provide for other consequences of violation, is incorrectly worded, which led to incorrect interpretation.
 In this case, the Russian city must be established. Article 168 of the Criminal Code, which stipulates that a transaction that does not comply with arbitrary legal acts is null and void, unless the law stipulates that such a transaction is invalid or does not provide for other consequences of the violation.
 Meanwhile, the RA legislator, ignoring the Civil Code. day. The rules for the invalidity of invalid transactions in Article 303 are irrelevant in Article 305, which is a gross error.
Based on the above, it should be noted that non-observance of the written form of the loan agreement can not lead to the obligation to prove the fact of its conclusion, because it is not concluded by the force of law, it is not valid.
  That is, the transaction contrary to the law is invalid in itself, չկա there is no need to declare it invalid, the parties can not dispute its legal force at all1.
  Void transactions do not cause any legal consequences (rights և obligations) for the parties.
  In fact, they can not be declared invalid, as only concluded and valid transactions can be declared invalid.
Due to the fact that they are not sealed, it is not possible to demand penalties, interest on the other hand in case of non-fulfillment of certain obligations 2.
 The norms applicable to the challenge of invalid transactions may not be applied to void transactions, as only the concluded transaction can be declared invalid3.
  The Civil Code of the Russian Federation does not stipulate that the loan agreement is irrelevant, but directly stipulates that failure to keep the written form leads to invalidity.
  It follows from this that the mouse of Russia. If the Code allows, to challenge the conclusion of the contract, as the existence of an invalid contract can be confirmed by any written evidence.
 And the RA Civil Code, envisaging in case of non-registration of the invalidity of the contract, deprives the parties of the opportunity to challenge its conclusion by all possible means.
  It should be noted that the applicability of the loan agreement is so urgent that it seems completely pointless to predict the relationship in case of non-compliance with the written agreement.
  In any case, it would be right not to define the relationship as a backlog of the loan agreement, and if the parties are allowed by law to enter into orally concluded transactions, they will be able to challenge the legal force of the agreement.
The RA Civil Code provides for the possibility of concluding a loan agreement, but does not indicate how.
 There are some disagreements on this issue.
 The fact of concluding an agreement between the parties is confirmed by the contract, but we should not forget about the nature of the loan agreement, when the loan agreement is considered concluded from the moment of transferring the amount or other property determined by type.
  It follows that the loan agreement between the parties is binding 1 See “Commentary on the Civil Code of the Russian Federation”, p. 1, in order. T. Абовой, А. Kabalkina, Moscow, 2002.
2 See Rabinovich N., Inadequacy of action and its consequences, Leningrad, 1996, p. 21.
3 See Formation of the Federal Arbitration Court 14.08.2006. № Ф04-5105 / 2006 (25350-А03-5).
creates relations from the moment of the actual transfer of money, which can be confirmed by a receipt or other document, and the contract includes only the offer of transfer of money և the agreement of the other party 1.
 It is possible that the terms of the transfer of the money կն do not coincide, which can cause serious consequences, and in the case of the receipt, the date of the transfer of the money is specifically indicated.
 There may be cases when the funds are transferred immediately at the time of signing the contract, և the date of their receipt is indicated.
 In this case, of course, there will be no need to submit a receipt.
  The Constitutional Court of Ukraine, in examining such a case, came to the conclusion that the written form of the contract confirms the existence of the contract, but the transfer of non-monetary funds.
  Such an approach is justified as follows: "If the contract is concluded and the funds are not transferred to the borrower, then the unscrupulous lender has all the opportunities to demand the return of the money from the borrower" 2.
 In other words, if there is a written contract, but there is no receipt, then there is no fact of transfer of funds, there is no agreement to provide a loan.
  Only the existence of the contract can be a fact confirming the conclusion of the loan in the case when the contract specifically provides for the fact of transfer of money, ie when the amount was transferred immediately at the time of signing the contract.
 However, there are generally cases when the terms of signing the contract and the transfer of funds do not coincide, in which case the existence of the contract can be confirmed only through a receipt.
 We consider it necessary to mention that by law the written form is considered protected, if its content is stated, և the signatures of the persons concluding the transaction are available.
  Those who make a deal can express their will in any way, as there are no special requirements for the content.
  It is a mandatory requirement that the document contains the necessary conditions that make up the content of the transaction: the data of the parties, the subject of the transaction, mutual rights և obligations, characteristics և signatures of the parties to the transaction3.
 The post-transaction transaction has legal force after signing.
  City. According to Part 2 of Article 878 of the Code of Criminal Procedure: "In receipt of the loan agreement և its terms, a receipt issued by the borrower or other document certifying the lender's money or other document certifying the payment of a certain amount of property may be submitted."
 The RA Court of Cassation in its decision stated that the receipt is a debt document issued by the debtor as a confirmation of the obligation, by which the debtor accepts his debt to the creditor.
 Giving a receipt is an action proving the recognition of the debt by the obligor, in the presence of which it is not the circumstance in whose presence or where the action was performed, but the fact that the debtor has accepted (recognized) his debt to the creditor4.
However, it must be stated in the receipt that one party has transferred the amount 1 See "Civil Law", page 429.
2 See Braginski M., Vitryansky V., p. 78.
3 See "Civil Law of the Republic of Armenia", part 1, page 213.
4 See RA Cassation Court 3-152 (VD), 02.03.2007. the decision.
to the other party, who undertook to return it within the period specified in the receipt.
  The Russian Arbitration Court, after examining a case of non-compliance with the written form of the loan agreement, concluded that the receipt submitted by the plaintiff could not be evidence of the conclusion of the agreement, as it did not contain a note on the defendant's obligation to provide the plaintiff with money. , as he did not prove the fact that the money was transferred by the lender 1.
 Unless otherwise specified, the document may be considered a promissory note.
  That is, the receipt must specifically specify the rights of the lender պահանջ the obligation to repay the borrower, otherwise the document can be considered as a fact of concluding any legal relationship between the subjects of civil law.
The parties to the loan agreement are the lender և the borrower.
  Individuals, legal entities, as well as the Republic of Armenia, state and local self-government bodies can be parties to the contract.
  As the transfer of money is not included in the exclusive banking functions, no special permit is required for this activity.
  It is with this feature that a distinction is made between a loan agreement, where any legal entity can act as a party, "between a loan agreement", when the entity can be only a bank or another credit organization2.
A third party can be considered a party to a loan agreement who is not, in fact, a subject of the agreement, but becomes a direct party to this legal relationship.
 This is possible when the money or property is transferred not directly to the lender, but to a third party who has a different legal relationship with the borrower.
 This situation would be considered as factoring with a special entity with the participation of the bank.
  However, in this case, when the participants in the legal relationship are individuals, a loan agreement must be signed.
 RA city. According to Article 877 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. "Under the loan agreement, one party (the lender) transfers to the other party (the borrower) property in drams or items determined by type characteristics, and the borrower undertakes to return to the lender the same amount of money (loan amount) or an equal amount of items of the same type."
  It follows from the notion that the loan must be handed over to the borrower.
  However, there are cases when the parties agree that the lender should transfer the money not directly to the borrower, but to a third party, which is very common in practice.
  Such a relationship can be seen as a donation, as it is the type of contract that stipulates that one party transfers or undertakes to transfer property to the other party free of charge or to transfer property rights to himself or a third party (or to release or commit to release to himself or a third party). property liability).
  But here we are dealing with another problem. Donation is made only for free.
 Therefore, if the above right 1 See Formation of the Federal Arbitration Court of Western-Siberian District of August 8, 2002. NFO4 / 2745-549 / A46-2002.
2 See Braginski M., Vitryansky V., p. 67.
If we regulate the relationship according to the rules of donation, then the borrower will find himself in an unfavorable situation և he cannot demand a refund from the borrower, as it will be considered sealed with a gratuitous egg.
 Therefore, the loan agreement must be drafted in such a way that the lender has the opportunity to transfer the money not only directly to the borrower, but also to the person indicated by him.
 It may look like this: "Under a loan agreement, one party (the lender) transfers ownership to the other party (the borrower) or money, or items determined by species, or property rights to a third party, or releases or undertakes to release himself or a third party. The borrower is obliged to return either the same amount of money (the amount of the loan) to the lender, or items of the same type and quality, or to take appropriate actions.
The subject of the loan agreement is most often the monetary amount, expressed in AMD, as well as the items determined by specific features.
 The borrower undertakes not to return the same items, but items of the same "quality" and quantity.
 The same applies to money, ie it is returned in the same amount, but with any banknotes.
  The peculiarity of the object of the loan agreement is that the use of funds and items presupposes their sale.
  For this reason, the items or funds transferred from the lender become the property of the borrower.
  Only in this case the borrower will have the right to use and dispose of them.
  As the law stipulates that the items determined by the "dram" and "type" features are movable, so the right of ownership over them arises from the moment of transfer.
  By transfer we mean the provision of property to the party.
 It shall be deemed to have been transferred from the moment of actual possession of the person indicated by the party's will1.
The issue of considering the types of funds as a subject of borrowing gives rise to controversy.
  When talking about money as a subject of obligation, a question arises, is it about cash or non-cash money?
 Due to their legal nature, cash and non-cash funds are various objects of civil law.
  Cash is classified as a commodity (divisible, determinable by type, usable through sale) և can be the subject of both property and liability.
  And in the case of cash, we can not talk about the things that actually exist, we can only talk about the legal part of the claim, which has a binding legal nature.
The opinion has been expressed in the legal literature that only cash can be the subject of a loan agreement, as non-cash funds, being a right of demand by bank transfer, can only be the subject of a loan agreement2.
  However, the RA Civil Code does not prohibit the transfer of non-cash funds as a subject of a loan agreement.
  That 1 See Braginsky M., Vitryansky V., p. 70.
2 See Civil Law, page 206.
The city of Armenia testifies about Part 3 of Article 880 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. "The loan amount is considered returned at the moment of handing it over to the lender or transferring it to his bank account, unless otherwise provided by law or the loan agreement."
  It follows that the money can be transferred both by cash and non-cash eggs.
  V. Belov points out that if the subject of the loan agreement is non-cash money, then we can talk about the fulfillment of monetary obligations conditionally.
  In this case, there is no actual physical transfer of money, և second, a third person is involved in the relationship, the bank, which transfers the funds1.
 We think that a distinction should not be made between cash and non-cash funds, as the inflow of money into the bank or its transfer, withdrawal, speaks only of a change in the legal relationship, the legal fact of which is the fulfillment of monetary obligations.
If the change is a transfer of funds from one account to another, then we are dealing with a change in the legal relationship through renewal, when the transfer of money from one account to another transfers the borrower's liability to the bank's liability.
 That is, there is a change in the participants of the legal relationship, accordingly, the legal relationship is renewed.
Speaking of the loan agreement, one should not fail to mention its timeliness and applicability.
  In fact, it is almost one of the easiest transactions regulated by the Civil Code, but the practice shows that the law in some issues due to incorrect regulation has led to the absolute imperative of norms, not allowing the parties to choose their own rules of conduct.
 The Civil Code has established a real nature of the loan agreement - a legal one that invalidates the prior agreement of the parties, which is not justified at all.
By establishing the relevance of the contract in case of non-fulfillment of that requirement in writing, the legislator deprived the parties of the opportunity to prove the conclusion of the contract by any means.
Summing up the above-mentioned, we think that certain legislative changes in the norms regulating the loan agreement would make the loan agreements actually concluded more consistent and appropriate.
1 See Belov V., Today's Objectives, Moscow, 2001, p. 152.
Sona Khachatryan LEGAL SETTLEMENT OF THE TRANSACTION AGREEMENT BY RA LEGISLATION Keywords: loan agreement, lender, borrower, unilateral transaction, consensual agreement, invalidity of the transaction, preliminary contract, null and void transaction.
