POSTMODERNISM IN ITALY.
 UMBERTO ECO'S "PREVIOUS DAY" AS A POSTMODERNIST NOVEL Postmodernism has received different expressions in different countries, among which the Italian takes its special place, in particular, according to the enlightened representative Umbert, according to Umbert.
  The aim of the article is to study the development of postmodernism in Italy, especially in the novel "Island of the Previous Day" by Umberto Eco.
Eco has hardly been studied by Armenian literary critics; from that point of view, this article is the first attempt to study the given work.
One of the first Italian authors to address postmodernism was Gianni Vatimo ("Il pensiero debole" ("Weak Thought"), 1983; fine "La fine della modernita" (The End of Modernism), 1985), who in his works postmodernism ուժեղ thought) և pensiero debole (weak thought) opposition.
 The strong mind, the expressions of which are, for example, Hegelianism, Marxism, psychoanalysis, is specific to modernism, the weak mind, that is, pluralism, tolerance, respectively, is specific to postmodernism1.
A few years later, Remo Cesarini addresses the same issue in his work "Raccontare il postmoderno" ("Everything about postmodernism"), where F. Like Jamieson, he presents the stages of postmodernism, combining them with certain stages of capitalism.
  In Italy, according to him, postmodernism dates back to the 1970s. ։ is associated with a number of political, social, economic and cultural changes.
The biggest change in the cultural life, in his opinion, is that the intellectual finally loses his decisive role in this sphere, because the market decides.
 R. Cesarini considers that postmodernist literature does not have its own style. own poetics is a mixture of other styles and genres, pastiche 2.
Walter Pedula, like Gianni Vatimo, calls postmodernism extremely tolerant because it accepts everything that modernism has fought against.
 The author compares this phenomenon with the pluralism existing in politics, considering that there are no political or social conflicts for it, there are no borders, everything is possible.
 According to V. Pedula, postmodernism has a "diplomatic passport".
  The author defines the new literature as "immovable", unbelieving in change, but this immovable literature sets in motion all the mechanisms of interpretation.
  Here V. Pedula, in fact, speaks about the "openness" of postmodernist works.
  This does not mean that the readership is limited, as the market dictates who will write what1.
Unlike the above-mentioned authors, U. Eko finds it difficult to say that postmodernism originated, moreover, he considers that it is not a phenomenon with some time limits, but a mental state; in this sense, every century, period has its postmodernism, which emerges in the present time. when modernism has no place to move. "The past oppresses, ... Now the avant-garde (modernism) emerges, it destroys, deforms the past… It does not stop, it destroys the image, denies it, achieves abstraction, ugliness, pure canvas, opened in the canvas hole, stiffness, white page ”2.
  According to Eco, when the avant-garde no longer has "room to move", postmodernism emerges, which is the answer to the avant-garde, modernism. "If it is not possible to eliminate the past, because it leads to stupidity, then it must be reinterpreted with irony, not naivety" 3.
The most important of the many characteristics of postmodernism is the intertextuality, which the author widely uses in his works, noting that each book tells about other books. "... The writers always knew and always insisted that all the books talk about other books, that any story tells a story that has already been told.
  It was known to Homer, it was known to Ariosto, not to mention Rabelais and Cervantes. ”4
As we have seen, Italian theorists agree that postmodernism accepts everything that existed before it, creating a mixture of genres.
 It does not try to define new truths, but seeks to reinterpret what already exists, often referring to history itself.
  Within the framework of this article we will try to present U. Eco's artistic work, drawing parallels with D. With Defoe's work.
Symbolist, aesthetic, historian of medieval literature, critic, essayist, professor at the University of Bologna, honorary professor at a number of European-American universities, author of dozens of books. EconItaly is one of the most active volcanoes in intellectual thought.
 "No one knows more than him," English contemporary Anthony Burgess said in an interview.
  And. Eco's international fame was brought not by scientific, but by algorithmic activity, although each of his books has mainly a scientific sub-layer.
  The works of the world-famous scientist become bestsellers, at the same time remaining under the full attention of the literary world.
 The first novel, "The Name of the Rose", was published in 1980, and in 2011. published his last, The Prague Cemetery, in the same place, p. 102.
4 Ibid., P. 92.
p.
 And. Eco has published a number of novels ("Foucault's Swing", "The Previous Island", "Baudolino", "The Mysterious Fire of Queen Loanna"), which are written in a postmodern style, with a unique irony typical of the Middle Ages.
"The Island of the Previous Day" is the third novel of the writer.
 It was particularly in the XVII century. It is a set of quotations from various scientific and fiction books.
  This is the intertextuality of the novel, which is one of the peculiarities of postmodernism.
 As in the novel The Name of the Rose, there are many subtextual names in this novel, such as Wilhelm Baskerwilts being identified with Arthur Conan Doyle's hero Sherlock Holmes, or Jorge Burgas symbolizing Jorge Luis Borges as his Babelonian.
There are also historical prototypes of heroes in the novel "The Island of the Previous Day", for example, Father Immanuel is the Jesuit Emanule Tezauro, the author of the widely quoted treatise "Aristotle's Telescope" in the text.
 Charming Siranode Bergerac is almost portrait in the novel, but Eco quotes Bergerac as a monologue գրել When writing letters to the Beautiful Lady.
 The main character, Robert de la Grieve, is identified with the famous hero of Daniel Defoe, Robinson Crusoe.
  The heroes of both novels are from the time of their creators, but from the Baroque period.
 Baroque writers often wrote about the transience of human life, the weight of the world.
  Hence the themes of earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and sea storms.
  XVI-XVII centuries The island is one of the most common tops of literature.
The uninhabited island often symbolized human loneliness.
 The fates of the heroes are similar: childhood, war years, brother (although Robert invented him), both of them write letters after the shipwreck.
 The trick of using letters to make the work more authentic, which unites Eco-Defoe, is typical of both the 18th century and postmodernism.
Another feature of postmodernism is that the authors of this current often refer to the past.
 Postmodernists are convinced that history is completely subjective, because that is what a certain individual tells, "This is exactly what U. Eko does in all his works.
 Turning to the past is very special for the Italian postmodernist novel, where the story is presented in two planes. In the first, the "lies of the official history" are revealed, և an attempt is made to restore the real course of events, and in the second, without giving an unequivocal answer, the mechanisms that cause suspicion are depicted, hence new assumptions and assumptions.
  The illusion of truthfulness is one of the means when the author hides with the hero, who allegedly witnessed it all.
 D. Urnov writes that the main driving force of modern literature is the opposition of "truth" և "fiction" - a response to the knightly novel և poetry, full of miracles1.
 In the last pages of the novel U. It proves the truth of the novel.
  He reports the coordinates of the island, latitude and longitude, quoting testimonies of people who have participated in research in those places, thus forcing the reader to believe what he has read.
 The pursuit of truth characterizes U. Eco style.
 The novel, along with the simplicity of the plot, is a complex of intellectual games.
  It should be noted that for writers, increasing the truth is a way to escape from loneliness for their heroes.
Ն. Paskharyan writes this way in the XVIII century. about novelists. "These circulars play nonsense in one way or another, always letting the reader know about that game, but always leaving doubt that it will happen."
 The game is one of the main definitions of postmodernism. First of all, the writer's game to the reader, the game to the text, the game as a text.
 And. Eco plays D. Defoe's text, using the novel "Robinson Crusoe", at the same time it is being processed.
 Hence the "imitation of historical, documentary or documentary genres peculiar to both the eighteenth century and postmodernism, referring to the history written by little-known or generally unknown people, which is in fact impossible to verify."
Besides, the relics of the famous postmodernist game already existed in the literature of the XVIII century.
 Letters never convey as much information as they do about eternity.
  The novel tells about the novel written by Roberto de la Grieve, who remained on the "Laurel" ship.
  Both novels have no logical ending.
  And. Eco used postmodernist tricks, which were also used by Italo Calvino in his novel "If a winter night a traveler".
And. Eco, as a theorist of postmodernism, a postmodernist writer, examines and explains the mechanisms and features of postmodernist literature in his theoretical works.
  His works are characterized by almost all the features attributed to postmodernism: the wide application of intertextuality, irony, a mixture of genres, openness, as well as the inclusion of a detective element specific to Italian postmodernism, the application to history.
  However, in our opinion, U. Eco postmodernism can not be called pessimistic, moreover, with his works he seems to want to "defend" postmodernist literature, showing that postmodernist literature, despite its tendency to popularize, can give high works of art.
Hasmik Karapetyan POSTMODERNISM IN ITALY.
 UMBERTO ECO'S "ISLAND OF THE PREVIOUS DAY" AS A POSTMODERNISTIC NOVEL Keywords: postmodernism, modernism, Italian literature, Umberto Eco, Daniel Defoe, postmodernism, postmodernism, postmodernism
