SIAMANTO'S "RED NEWS FRIENDLY" SERIES The centuries-old goal of the Turkish criminal has always been "to leave one Armenian in the same museum."
 Back in the days of the Hamidian dictatorship, in 1894-1896, the Armenian massacres began, then a terrible crime was committed in 1904. In Sassoun, the next one was not too late. 1909 The Cilicia massacres were carried out by the Young Turks who came to power under the new government. Otyan called him "a mis-sultan Hamid"; all this reached its peak in 1915-1918, when it finally emptied Armenia.
 Like the previous horrible crimes, in 1909 The bloody realities of Cilicia were reflected in the works of a number of writers.
Siamanto was the first to raise a loud protest in the "Red News" series, then D. Varuzhan, R. Siak, Z. Yesayan և others, who, shocked by the realities that took place, expressed their grief, creating the artistic history of the disaster.
Siamanto was once a poet who kept pace with the times.
  In his pen he reacted to the events of life և he artistically expressed his ideas.
 Evidence of this is the "Red-haired friend" series, written in 1909. in the summer, K. In Constantinople, affected by the severe events of the Adana massacre.
 First, let's look at the title.
What did he say "red news"? These were news of bloodshed, massacres, and massacres that reached Siamanto from his "relatives", eyewitnesses Zapel Yesayan, Suren Partyan, with whom Siamanto met in 1901-1902 in Paris.
The cases described in Siamanto's poems can be found in them: Z. In Yesayan's "In the Ruins" և In Suren Partyan's "In the Days of Disaster".
In his new song series, Siamanto creates gloomy images of tragedy in bright artistic colors.
  In "Red News" Siamanto tries to present cases, events, to reveal images of unspeakable human atrocities with their true description.
There are several moods in the book.
  First, the poet gives the terrifying images of the bloody massacre, then gives hope, then raises the cry of struggle.
  The poem "Mourning", which opens the book, raises universal questions related to human և humanity, loneliness of sorrow.
 The stranger will never understand the stranger's grief, our grief is only ours, and the stranger is indifferent.
 D. was well aware of all this. Varuzhan, when he wrote in the poem "March of War": Girl, tears to the tears of others Do you know how indifferent my world is… 1 Teryan felt right when he said: The foreigner will not understand us, The cold stranger will not understand us 2 .
Siamathon writes with the same bitter sadness. Because I have always found the suffering of the Armenian soul in the mirrors3.
It seems that the poet falls into the arms of despair, but it cries out;
He wants to be a mirror reflecting deaths and bloody horrors, trying to show the degrees of human inferiority.
Siamanto tries to look at the event from a different angle, asking seemingly unanswered questions. Why does a person "smile" prey on someone like him, why does a person not understand a person, why does life work out such horrible laws and sigh bitterly? The law of life is still like this. People could not comprehend people… 5 And there will always be catastrophes against man by man, until the human being comprehends the essence of his being.
  All this gives birth only to death, devastation.
Against this background, Siamanto embodies the crime episode by episode, depicting horrible scenes.
The poem "Dance" is in fact a hymn.
  The German woman, who witnessed the dying Armenian life, tells what is depicted in the poem.
  He sees that there is ruin around, the city has turned into a pile of ashes.
  The poet presents the enormity of the crime through the mouth of a German woman. "Oh, do not be afraid when I tell you my untold story," he says, so that humanity may believe in the seemingly unbelievable reality. "Let people understand human crime against man."
  The German woman, who was taking care of a pianist, a girl suffering from mental anguish, suddenly sees the atrocities committed by the "forest mob" from the "hell-looking balcony". Twenty Armenian brides were stripped naked and forced to dance hand in hand.
 Then they burn with a stone, և "the charred corpses rolled to death in the middle of the dance".
  This picture seems to create a contrast. 1 Varuzhan D., The Heart of the Tribe, Yerevan, 1991, p. 411.
2 Teryan V., Complete collection of works, Yerevan, 1985, page 280.
3 Siamanto, Selected Works, Yerevan, 1957, p. 149.
4 In the same place.
5 In the same place.
The situation is preferable to the shameful disgrace of this honor.
 Seeing this indescribable death dance, the German woman thought of nothing but "like the eyes of an eye."
  It is not at all accidental that Siamanto presents the case through the eyes of a stranger. This means that civilized nations either had to dig their eyes out to see the terrible injustices, or they had to come to the aid of preventing such atrocities.
  And here, like a roaring world, Siamanto's venomous words are heard through the mouth of a German woman: O human justice, let me spit in your forehead… 1.
With this exclamation, everything seems to be said. It is imbued with ուն tunic anger, և´ pain, շ a breath of revenge.
It is interesting and memorable that Sero Khanzadyan in his novel "Speak, Mountains of Armenia" depicted a similar episode depicted in "Dance": "The dance of naked bodies was crazy.
 Women danced with mourning, protest, rage.
  They sometimes squealed, as if trying to awaken the world-dead conscience. ”2
But there is no justice in the world, it is a fabrication, a myth.
  This speaks of the fact that time does not change the essence of the rules of practice developed by the Turks.
 He is the same at all times.
And so, picture by picture, Siamanto is the first, but not the only, to walk the "Dante's path of ashes of death" (Siamanton was the first among us to call the tragedy of the homeland "the Dante's path of ashes's death"). The scene was awful.
 The poor woman, wrapped in a branch cut from a mulberry tree, fell to the ground. I could not restrain my grief. On the's death path of our ashes, my friend accompanying me cried like a child.
It should be noted that Yeghishe Charents had the equivalent of Siamanto's phrase "The Dantean way of ashes's death" in his poem "Dantean Myth" 4.
Another image of suffering and disgust is the poem "Bath".
One revelation of the cruelty of the human soul, one argument of the zeroness of human life for man.
  The Turkish unborn woman, bathing in the blood of seven sixteen-year-old virgins, seeks to cure her infertility with the help of a magic spell, sacrificing seven innocent lives, trying to fill the savages with one more bloodbath.
 The picture is quite impressive. Standing in the basin, he stood up, the warm blood of the Armenian virgins was reddish… He started with his bare and untroubled legs, until his barren uterus rose։ 5.
In another poem, entitled "The Dagger", the humble, filthy essence of the Turk is completely revealed, which Siamanto had discovered while still in the "Children" series "Let the Hangmen Be Done" 1 Siamanto, p. 154.
2 Khanzadyan S., Speak the Mountains of Armenia, Yerevan, 1980, p. 455.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Muradyan S., Literary destinations, h. C, Yerevan, 2010, page 110.
5 Siamanto, p. 156.
(By the way, this has beggars with Charents' poem "Vision of Death") saying: The pagan mob was furiously down, on the square, in the mud, spoiling the mud.
In this poem we see the action of a "soulless man" enslaved to unspeakable dark passions.
 After robbing the mob, the big man forces the Armenian woman to kill her two-year-old son with her own hands, stabbing the child's heart seven times with her mother's hands.
To deprive an innocent, non-living being of life is inhuman, not even typical of beasts.
  But the Turk does not take into account age, gender, poverty or wealth. in other words, he is against the physical existence of a Christian in general.
Proof of this is the case of a Bulgarian family depicted in Dostoevsky's novel "Brothers Karamazov". "Here is the baby sucking, in the hands of a trembling mother, Turks invading around.
  They started a fun game. They cherish the child and make him laugh.
  The Turk points a gun at his face, and the child chirps happily, extends his paws to grab the gun, և the artist suddenly does not point the knob directly at his face, smashes his head է It is art, isn't it?
This bloody series of poems depicts not only physical but also tragic cases of mental massacre.
 The proof of this is the poem "Suffocation".
  As we have already mentioned, the desire for poetic images can be seen in the books of eyewitnesses.
F. In the book "In the Ruins", Yesayan tells the real story of the incident depicted in the poem. "It was in those days, a group of people came suddenly, the surrounding robbers took refuge in a basement, the sounds of guns were constantly shouting at them." Terrified, they are always silent and motionless. Suddenly the voice of an unconscious and brave child growls.
 The spirit of self-defense is raging, people want to take it.
 Enmankik's father and mother are there. the terrible crime has been decided ”3.
Brutal acts brutalize the victim, distort the human, moral description, make him mentally disabled.
 The child is killed for self-defense, the rock silence is restored, but this time the silence was a storm in the basement4.
The mental storm had risen in the external silence. I awoke for a moment to think that we all died with dignity։ 5.
Then the ghost of a mad mother who wanders the streets and begs for death is outlined.
1 Siamanto, p. 67.
2 Dostoevsky M., The Karamazov Brothers, Yerevan, 1983, p. 338.
3 Yesayan Z., In the Ruins, Yerevan, 2006, p. 57.
4 Siamanto, p. 179.
5 Ibid., P. 181.
This is such a criminal world before the eyes of the poet, where even the Dantean horrors grieve.
Breath of death everywhere, the breadth of death!
  Here are the barbarians drinking blood with virgin skulls ("Their song"), here is the "God-fearing" old man, drinking the blood of an Armenian young man in front of an orphaned family, atoning for the sins of young people ("Atonement"), etc.
"These are pictures that speak of uprooting the Armenian life, taking away the invincible," Tumanyan was right when he shouted in shame at humanity. O shame, shame… shame on everyone, Shame on man։ on time.
 The dog should not ask the dog, What man asks of someone like him1.
                    ("Meditation on the Armenian Question") However, despite the endless deaths, there are voices of life and struggle on the color of the Genocide.
 Siamanto looks to the future with new expectations, he is convinced that the people who know how to fight will not be lost, otherwise a struggle is needed to establish a just right to life, and the condensations of this idea are the poems "A Victory" and "The Child".
The basis of the poem "A Victory" is the heroic resistance of the people of Chor Marzpan (Dort Yol).
 Describing the fate of the Armenians with the line "Our souls are rebellious, our homeland is a heap, our future is catastrophic", he exposes the essence of the Turks and the policy of the European powers, insults the massacres. The warships, awake to the depths of foreign justice իրենց 2.
It is known that there were warships on the shores of Cilicia that helped the Turkish bandits.
  And here is the brave young man, turning his dead body into an example and a barrier, giving hope to the fighters with bright aspirations for victory. The victory is ours, shoot, Asteghabib Brothers!
In the poem "The Child" there is the idea of ​​national preservation, generational success, which has found its expression in the image of an Armenian villager, which embodies the longevity of the Armenian people.
 Fighting all night against the terrible waves of the river, he takes his son to the shores of the Mediterranean, saving the only "hope for his ruined village."
In this respect, the image has some similarities with the image of Axel Bakunts's novel Hazro, the hero of the novel "Apricot Money".
Thus, we want to conclude the word with another expression similar to Garegin Nzhdeh's phrase "Power begets right". "The power of willpower gives birth to the right to live."
1 Tumanyan H., Works, h. 1, Yerevan, 1985, page 92.
2 Siamanto, p. 185.
Gayane Asatryan SIAMANTO'S "RED NEWS FRIENDS" SERIES Keywords: Siamanto, "Red News", massacres of Cilicia Armenians, Turks, struggle, bloodOur goal in this work is
