OBSTACLES TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTRONIC TRADE IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA AND THEIR LEGAL SOLUTIONS Electronic commerce (hereinafter referred to as e-commerce) is developing rapidly all over the world.
  Every day in different parts of the world is increasing. The number of trade users.
 The same tendency has been registered in the Republic of Armenia for the last 2 years, many new websites have been created, which allow to carry out electronic trade.
  Despite the fact that the e-mail. The trade has developed a little, also of international nature. Trade dominates և will continue to prevail, as Armenia is more of an importer than an exporter.
  RA International E-mail There are many obstacles to the development of trade, which are related to both international postal and customs activities, which we will address in this paper and try to give our approaches to their legal solutions.
Transportation of goods has an important role in e-commerce.
According to the RA Government 2009 Decision N 947-N of August 20. The Government of the Republic of Armenia has decided to establish a specialized customs house for goods transported by international postal courier delivery to the State Revenue Committee under the Government of the Republic of Armenia.
  The whole territory of the Republic of Armenia is an area of ​​specialized customs activity of goods transported by international postal courier deliveries to the State Revenue Committee under the Government of the Republic of Armenia. ”
The activity of the specialized customs house for goods transported by courier deliveries of the State Revenue Committee under the Government of the Republic of Armenia is regulated by the Customs Code of the Republic of Armenia. By the decision N 4 adopted on January 8, 1.
According to Part 2 of Article 105 of the RA Customs Code, “the customs duty on goods transported by individuals by international postal or courier services across the customs border of the Republic of Armenia is calculated at the following rates: a) 0%, if the total weight of transported goods does not exceed 20 kg; The purchase price does not exceed 150 thousand. b) 2.5%, if the total weight of the imported goods does not exceed 20 kg, and the purchase price exceeds 150 thousand. AMD, but does not exceed 300 thousand. the money. "
1 See the decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia on the approval of the procedure for transportation of goods transported by international mail or courier by individuals through the customs border of the Republic of Armenia, 08.01.2001, N 4.
2001 by the Government of the Republic of Armenia Point 13 of the decision N 4 adopted on January 8 defines: "... if as a result of the inspection it turns out that there are goods in the consignment exceeding the natural-value quantities defined by Part 2 of Article 105 of the Customs Code of the Republic of Armenia or subject to non-tariff regulation, the consignment shall not be released. A coupon for declaring customs duties on goods in the consignment shall be issued in accordance with N 2, which indicates the amount of customs duties to be paid, if the documents accompanying the consignment contain the customs value of goods transported across the customs border of the Republic of Armenia. the documents. "
  Examining the above-mentioned legal acts, we see that none of them or any act of the RA legislation contains a norm, which sets minimum deadlines, during which the customs body is obliged to fulfill the obligations defined by points 5/13 or 13 of the above-mentioned decision.
  As a result of numerous studies, we see that the lack of being defined by the law or the decision of the Government leads to certain arbitrariness.
E-mail Almost all shopping sites have a delivery deadline, during which e. The person registered as a seller on the trade website (hereinafter referred to as the seller) is obliged to deliver the goods to the buyer through the transport company.
  Some sites set a 60-day deadline1, which guarantees that sellers will deliver the product to the buyer within that period.
  In practice, we often encounter violations of these deadlines, a large number of which are not related to the dishonesty of the seller or the shipping company.
  However, since the e-commerce sites in their rules define compensation mechanisms, which work not only in the case when the seller e-mail. publishes an offer with information that does not correspond to the product being sold on the merchant's website, but also in the event that the seller receives the product purchased by him within the timeframe set on the website.
  Thus, the question arises, what happens when the buyer e. does not receive the goods within the timeframe set on the merchant's website, but it lacks the dishonesty of both the seller and the carrier.
  The following happens in practice. the buyer is perfect. Opens a dispute (case) on the merchant's website, or applies to the customer support center, or otherwise (depending on the rules of the site) requests a refund, stating the fact of the guaranteed ժամկետ guaranteed term violation.
 In that case, too. The trading site, accepting the fact that the buyer did not actually receive the product within the timeframe set on the site, returns the money to the buyer.
 However, after some time, when the deadline set on the website has passed, և the buyer has received his compensation, he ստանում receives his product.
  In this case, the following problems arise: either the buyer has to return the money that was returned to him, or he has to send the product back to the seller.
  In this case, there is a loss not for the buyer, but for the seller.
 But in most cases buyers in good faith 1 See for example http.
//www.aliexpress.com/buyerprotection/seller_guaranteed.html#1.
They do not work, they do not return the goods or the money.
 In that case, the seller actually suffers.
 The above-mentioned problems arise, as in many cases the customs body does not implement the 2001 budget of the Government of the Republic of Armenia within a reasonable time. The obligations provided for in points 5 և / or 13 of the decision N 4 adopted on January 8.
Thus, the above-mentioned problem e. is an obstacle to the development of trade in Armenia, as it complicates e. The trade, which leads to the parties' losses, "can" be an occasion to reduce the number of RA citizens, sellers of goods.
  We offer a legal solution to this obstacle. Adopted by the Government of the Republic of Armenia in 2001 On making additions to the decision N 4 adopted on January 8, ”Government decision.
 This decision should envisage a norm, which will define the following: "The customs body shall fulfill the obligations defined by point 5 և / or point 13 of this decision no later than within 3 days after receiving the goods."
E-mail Another obstacle affecting the development of trade is the customs assessment by the RA customs authorities.
  According to the Government 2001 13th point of the decision N 4 of January 8. "If, as a result of the inspection, it turns out that the item includes goods in excess of the value-value or subject to non-tariff regulation defined by Part 2 of Article 105 of the Customs Code of the Republic of Armenia, the item shall not be released. The customs body shall give the carrier the item in the item. Receipt on payment of customs duties according to N 2, which indicates the amount of customs duties to be paid, if the accompanying documents contain all the documents required by the Customs Code of the Republic of Armenia to calculate the customs value of goods transported across the customs border of the Republic of Armenia.
  And according to Article 87, Part 1 of the RA Customs Code. "In order to calculate the customs value of goods transported across the customs border by the transaction price method, the declarant must submit together with the customs declaration: 1) the document of purchase of goods in the exporting country, which must contain the month, date, serial number, seller (consignor), buyer (recipient) , detailed description of the product (name, if available, trademark or trade name), information on places / quantity, unit of measure, unit value, weight, total cost, as well as proof of payment or further payment obligation (letter of guarantee or seller-seller-buyer agreed other document).
According to Article 94 of the RA Customs Code, the rules for determining the customs value mentioned in Articles 87-93 of the Code are applied in order.
 Another norm of the Customs Code, Article 88, stipulates: «1. When determining the customs value in accordance with Article 87 of this Code, in case of impossibility to determine the customs value due to the lack of information provided for in Article 87 of the Expenses defined in Article 83 of this Code, the customs value shall be determined by the customs authorities in the order defined in Article 94 of this Code.
2. For the purpose of determining the customs value in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, the customs authorities shall use the information received both from the foreign state bodies of the Republic of Armenia at their disposal and provided by the declarant from other sources not prohibited by law.
  The procedure for providing information to the customs authorities of the Republic of Armenia by the state bodies of the Republic of Armenia for the purpose envisaged by this point shall be established by the Government of the Republic of Armenia. ”
And Article 89 of the Customs Code stipulates that "the customs value of goods transported across the customs border to the Republic of Armenia shall be determined on the basis of the transaction price of the same goods sold for export to the importing country for the same or almost the same period, at commercial levels" (or adjustments due to differences in the quantities of goods.
 Such adjustments shall be based on the information provided for in paragraph 3 of Article 95 of this Code, regardless of whether the transaction price is increased or decreased as a result of the adjustment. ”
From the above norms we see that in the case when. The goods purchased are subject to customs inspection, արդյունքում the inspection reveals that the goods are subject to customs clearance, և or the buyer submits to the customs authority the documents specified in Article 87 of the Customs Code, or the item contains the information prescribed by law, customs valuation of the goods is carried out by transaction price method .
  The transaction price method is the primary method of customs valuation of the product1, while the other methods of customs valuation are alternative2.
  The methods of customs valuation of goods are defined in the Customs Framework 1994 adopted by the World Trade Organization. Agreement on the Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement.
 As in the Customs Law 1994 Article VII of the General Agreement, as well as the RA Customs Code stipulates that if the customs value of imported goods cannot be determined by the transaction price method, the customs value is determined by the transaction price method of identical goods.
The transaction price of identical goods is the transaction value of the same goods sold for export to the same country of import և exported at or about the same time as the goods being valued3.
We propose to adopt the RA law on making changes in the Customs Code, in which it must be mentioned: "Read the first part of Article 89 with the following content: The customs value of goods transported across the customs border of the Republic of Armenia is determined to determine the customs value, used for the same goods as valued goods. 1 See "Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade", 1994.
2 See Rosenow Sh., O'Shea B., A Handbook on the WTO Customs Valuation Agreement, Cambridge UniversityPress, 2010, p. 24.
3 See “Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade”, art. 2.
The value of a transaction of substantially the same quantity at the same trading level.
 In the absence of such a sale, the value of the transaction of the same commodity traded at the alternative level (or) in other quantities is adjusted, taking into account differences in trade levels (or quantities) if those adjustments can be made on the basis of proven facts clearly corroborating the adjustment. Wisdom and accuracy, whether adjustment leads to an increase or decrease in value. ”
E-mail The next obstacle to the development of trade is related to e. with the customs clearance of gifts given with the purchased product.
 There are cases when: When selling, the seller sends a gift to the buyer with the delivered product.
 In that case, the question arises: should the gifted goods be cleared through customs, and if so, how?
 Examining the customs legislation of the Republic of Armenia, we find out that there is no legal regulation related to the customs clearance of gifts, which means that gifts, like other goods, must be cleared through customs in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Armenia, under the general customs clearance procedure.
Examining the foreign experience, we see that in different countries special customs clearance procedures for gifts are provided.
  Generally, a certain limit is set, the value of which exceeds the value of the goods subject to customs clearance for the difference between the set price and the value.
  Customs legislation in Canada stipulates that gift goods worth up to C $ 60 are not subject to customs clearance1.
  If, as a result of an assessment of a product by the Canadian Border Service Agency (CFSP), the value of the gift exceeds C $ 60, the amount owed is subject to statutory taxes։ customs duties.
 It should be noted that Canadian law defines a list of goods that may not be subject to the special customs clearance method for gift giving2.
 These products are tobacco, alcoholic beverages, advertising materials և products that are sent to the consumer by a business company3.
US customs clearance of gifts stipulates that if a person receives a gift that does not exceed $ 100 through postal or courier services, the product is not subject to customs clearance.
  This privilege can be used only once a day.
  If a person receives a gift or gifts in excess of $ 100 per day through postal or courier services, the product is subject to customs clearance in excess of the established price4.
  The list of products that people do not use when receiving a gift by mail is defined.
 These are non-alcoholic beverages, perfumes containing alcohol, cigars, cigarettes5.
1 See http.
//www.canadapost.ca/tools/pg/manual/PGcustoms-e.asp#1382747.
2 See http.
//www.cbsa-asfc.gc.ca/import/postal-postale/gifts-cadeaux-eng.html.
3 See ibid.
4 See https.
//help.cbp.gov/app/answers/detail/a_id/130/kw/gift%20item%20customs%20exemption%20limit.
5 See 19 CFR 10.153 (e).
In countries where special customs clearance conditions are in place for gifts, the gift item must be marked as a gift, but it should be noted that almost all of them. Shopping sites contain the opportunity to send non-gift goods as a gift.
 These sites indicate "this is a gift", when sending the Jarden product, the item on the item is marked as a gift.
 This circumstance in many cases allows buyers to avoid paying customs duties, but as we have seen, the Canadian legislature wanted to prevent cases of tax evasion by stipulating that goods sent by business companies but contain gift information are subject to under general conditions և customs clearance rules.
 But it should be noted that this regulation is ideal from two points of view. 1. There are cases when: In this way, the person buys from a company, but the item is sent by mail to any individual, in which case there is a de facto evasion of customs duties.
2. From the other point of view, there are many cases when the seller sends a gift attached to the item when buying a product.
 In this case, the gift is marked with information about it being a gift, but that gift must be subject to customs inspection under general conditions and rules, which, we think, is not so true.
Thus, studying the RA legislation յան foreign experience, we see that in the RA customs legislation there is a gap in the legal regulation of customs clearance of gifts by international postal deliveries through courier services, to complete which we propose to adopt the RA Law on Amendments to the Customs Code, which will be defined as follows: "Individuals may, in accordance with the procedure established by the Government of the Republic of Armenia, without customs duty, transfer gifts defined by this law, which are transported by international mail or courier services, the total customs value of which does not exceed 40 thousand AMD. the money. "
 The Customs Code should stipulate that a gift is a product that contains a note about being a gift, sent by a person not engaged in business activities to a natural person, that the value of the product does not exceed 20 thousand. The Armenian dram.
 The Customs Code should also define the list of goods that cannot be considered a gift within the meaning of the Code.
 These products are: • Cigarettes արդյուն Industrial tobacco substitutes, • Cigars, cut-edge cigars, cigarillos (thin cigars) և Cigarettes with tobacco or its substitutes, • Alcoholic beverages, • Essential oils և Retinoic, կ
Thus, the work examined e. The current state of trade in the Republic of Armenia, the obstacles to development have been identified and legal solutions have been provided.
Mr. KhachatryanELEKTRONAYIN TRADE DEVELOPMENT OBSTACLES Armenia as AND THEIR LEGAL LUTSUMNEREBanali words, e-commerce, barriers to electronic commerce, mail delivery, postal delivery, international mail delivery, items, customs clearance, customs clearance, the World Trade Organization, customs valuation, customs valuation methods gifts Clearance .
