THE IMAGE OF THE WRITER AND THE QUESTIONS OF LITERATURE LEVON KHECHOYAN'S NOVEL "BLACK BOOK, HEAVY BEET" The real writer is always alone… L Խon Khechoyan He puts any period of art and literature into the history of literature
 From time to time literature experiences a crisis, it faces a difficult question: how to write, about what? A literary collapse occurs, which is overcome by the writers themselves.
  The raising and discussion of these theoretical issues is often done through literary works.
  Such a period came during the period of independence of the Republic of Armenia, that period lasted quite a long time.
 Speaking about this period, Seyran Grigoryan anxiously announces the retreat of literature: "trying to see the reasons for it in political, social, economic coups," The more the cause of the latter, the more the consequence.
 Grigoryan sees a number of reasons for the barrenness of literature, from the political situation caused by the political situation (the collapse of the USSR, the Artsakh movement, the war) that dealt a severe blow to the literary will of Armenian writers, to the fact that writers abandon their main responsibilities and engage in politics.
  Leon Khechoyan's novel "The Book of the Heavy Beetle" is one of the works that, among other issues raised, came to answer a number of theoretical and aesthetic questions of his time.
Literature was a planned policy in the USSR.
  In the conditions of strict criticism, the writer had a problem with ideological nutrition.
  Under the pressure of literary criticism, the imprisoned writer, who was concerned about the problems of the nation, but was unable to express himself, had one problem: to secretly raise national, ideological and political issues.
 Today, the works of writers of that period are greatly valued not only for their artistic aspects, but also for the fact that they were able to voice ideological appeals, albeit allegorically.
What is the problem of the writer of the period of independence?
 In the conditions of "complete freedom" the writer seems to lose his primary role and significance.
That freedom fell on the literature of the Armenian writer (it is typical of all post-Soviet countries) as intoxication, permissiveness.
  However, if the literature of the period of independence presupposes the absence of propaganda, this is 1 See Grigoryan S., Philology և debate, Yerevan, 2002, pp. 142-155.
It does not mean that the writer is no longer responsible to the society.
Under these conditions, literature can become a kind of self-purpose, self-sufficient and chaotic event.
  In addition to the purpose of the literature, the issue of the content of the literature becomes urgent.
 The literature of the period of independence is also very sensitive to the issue of horses, the classical structures were no longer relevant and a new word, a word with a new content, should have a new egg.
  In these conditions, two questions become primary: first, why write, and second, how to write?
 The first question, unfortunately, is answered exhaustively by the writers themselves.
 Գ. Khanjyan says about this. "The writer must have a war with the world, he must be so gifted from above that he can weigh himself in that war, and already literature will automatically fulfill its function" 1.
 Here և L. Khechoyan, in his novel "The Book, a Heavy Beetle", touches upon the issue of the writer's literature, proposes a number of important theoretical and aesthetic questions for the literature of his time.
  In this way he seems to give the keys to understanding the literature of his contemporaries.
Ժ. Kalantaryan in his article "On the way of updating the genre" refers to this novel, examining it mainly from this theoretical and genre point of view.
  The literary critic first "refers to the image of the intellectual" and notices that in this novel the writer proposes a new artistic program, which with the main motives can be common for the modern production of this genre.
  He notices that in addition to creating a fictional story, the author also tries to give theoretical solutions for his time in terms of genre. "This is a new approach to the genre and its structure, which, disregarding the law enforcers (" I do not like the excellent ones with puffy faces ") is put forward by the author, which, in our impression, is typical of some of Khechoyan's descendants (G. Khanjyan, V. Tamaryan and others). .
 It means that Khechoyan generalizes artistic experience to some extent. ”2
The modern Armenian novel, like almost all the literature currently being created, is more inclined to insight.
  It is more a discussion, analysis, living, internal conflict of the inner world than a description of the classical moral conflicts in the external world.
 Both the European experience and the conditions in which that literature is created have their influence on modern Armenian literature.
 The subconscious world of the hero occupies a significant place in that introspective literature.
  Mythical saturation, the penetration of mythological elements into literature, mysticism, imagination, the influence of external forces on this life are typical.
It is possible to understand who the hero of today's novel is.
 It can be the author's self.
 He can be the author, under his own name or in another name, with his own or imaginary biography, or with his own biography, in which unreal or imaginary events penetrate.
  It should be noted that the hero of Orphan's novel stands out, first of all, being a biological being, whose actions often condition not instinct, but instinct. 1 Literary newspaper, 2004, No. 34.
2 Kalantaryan J., By way of updating the genre, http.
//www.cultural.am/en/gradaran/tester/jenyaqalantaryan-janri-tarmacman-ughiov.
aspirations.
 He is often a lonely, alien, misunderstood person who tries to find the meaning of life և existence.
  The latter is the influence of European literature, on the one hand, of naturalism, on the other hand, of existentialism, which found their expression in Western literature at the beginning of the last century.
 Favorable conditions were created during the independence period for the activation of the influence of these directions in the Armenian literature.
 On the one hand, the almost complete freedom of speech () not only) from the collapse of the USSR allowed writers (և not only) to speak (միայն not only) about naturalistic themes, which before, if not banned, at least were not encouraged, on the other hand, the earthquake and the war, which made the Armenian man, in general, the intellectual, in particular, think again about the meaning of life, death.
1999 Khechoyan brings the story of an individual (soldier, intellectual, man) with the novel "Book of S, heavy beetle" published in
  The novel "S book, heavy beetle" is about the events of the recent past, the reader can easily see the reaction of the days lived here, chronologically it is about the Artsakh war, the first period of Armenia's independence.
 The novel is multi-layered, it is a collection of more episodes.
 The author does not tell a plot, but constructs a novel, creating first of all a cultural-ontological environment, putting the hero sometimes in this or that situation.
 The author's task is not to propagate lofty values ​​through moral conflicts in another classical way. We are tired of everlasting questions and ready answers.
 The author tries to dissolve the person in the given moment, in the given situation.
 The novel is built by the flow of consciousness, the hero does not act more, but thinks, analyzes, feels, lives, է the egos of the author and the hero are intertwined in the image of Onan.
The chronotope gets a rather remarkable solution in the novel.
  In "Book…" time is divided, there is no common time in which the heroes live and work, the events develop.
  The interaction of the real, the dreamy, the imaginary, the subconscious, the events of the past creates a unique spatio-temporal picture, as a result of which in the novel we are constantly confronted with parallel spatio-temporal planes, when different times are mixed, events of the past are constantly brought back to the present. in և the opposite.
 In Khechoyan's novel, time flows like consciousness.
 The novel seeks not only what is in the three temporal dimensions (past, present, future), but also what is completely out of time. "The source of his origin, what he was striving for, that white light was out of time, out of time.
  In the whole universe, must there exist somewhere beyond time? ”(P. 180).
If we are going to talk about the character of the writer in the novel, we must note that from the main character, Onan, who is an intellectual and a writer, there is a migrant who has both an image and an influence in the novel.
 It is about Hrant Matosyan, whose influence on Khechoyan's literature was noticed by literary critics during the examination of the first book, "Incense Trees", where Ahnidzor influences are visible.
  When thinking about the Hrant Matosian influences of "Book S", it is immediately paralleled with "Khumhar".
 In "Book S", as in "Khumharum", the actions are transferred from the village to the city, the image of an intellectual is brought to the fore, who finally tries to write a new work.
  As in "Hanging", in "Book իր" the author raises a number of theoretical questions for the writers of his time. On the one hand, these are literary works, on the other hand, works about literature.
  Almost all of Khechoyan's works written before this novel have been partially included in the book, such an interweaving of other works is specific to the novel as well - Matosyan's "Khumhar".
  Matևosyan's "Hangover" discusses the issue of individual loneliness, and even if it is denied, the issue of the loneliness of the collective will be raised. Khechoyan writes about this issue in his latest novel, commenting on the issue of alienation through loneliness through the myths of Mher և Vahagn (later, when Khechoyan matured, the idea of ​​this Mher's myth grew into a novel).
  It is interesting that the author himself refers to Matosyan several times in "The Book".
 First, the author meets the "great writer" in the hospital, who mentioned the author "in half or less" in connection with the publication of his first book (this is a valid basis).
 In the eyes of the great writer he sees "the fatigue, the power, the power of the doubter of what he has seen, the power", he notices that the great writer is alone, and then he writes about it: "The real writer is always alone in the moment of panic, the moment of revelation time իս listening to unnoticed sounds from distant shores ”1.
 As he leaves, the author suddenly feels that "he lives on the border of two worlds, he has reached the last level of wisdom given by loneliness, and I have to go the further way from that last crossroads, and he knows nothing about my imminent loneliness" (p. 80).
  That "I have to cross the road alone" assumes that Khechoyan himself felt and realized Matosyan's influence on his creative literature. Once he tried to overcome the path of the great writer and continue alone from some point, at the same time carrying the previous legacy.
  An interesting fact. Khechoyan's soldiers suddenly start talking in the book in the words of Matosyan's shepherds. "Even the most loyal person to the Constitution in Moscow will not notice the disappearance of Siberia from the map, and if a herd of cows passes through a wheat field in Talin, Yerjan will fall into agony" (p. 150).
  However, despite the Matthosian influences or the attempt to overcome those influences, the "Book of S" was a crucial step for the prose of the period of independence not only as a literary-artistic phenomenon, but also as answering a number of theoretical-aesthetic questions or at least seeking answers.
The other character of the writer, who is already the main hero of the novel, the author himself, is seen for the first time in the novel in connection with the complaints of the villagers related to his novel.
  Here, it seems, the author shows the way of creating his first novel, reveals his aesthetic principles, his worldview of the writer, through texts that roughly expose the reality of the peasants' denial. "The truthfulness of the characters does not mean the history of one person on earth գյուղ one village" (p. 24).
  He states that a real writer can see much more from the distance of time and space և 1 Khechoyan L., Voices և visions, Yerevan, 2006, p. 40.
 Next, the link to this book will be quoted in parentheses.
even to see the invisible, that the same reality is inaccessible to the near-sighted or ordinary person. "What I have written is the story of a village that has passed through my inner peace, which has worked hard all my life, born of endless renunciation, of the council of complete peace, and my biography has become a story about people who were subconsciously preserved in my artistic memory.
  Time had passed, "the biographies corresponding to my ability to watch from a distance, to the eyes of the seer, were recreated" (p. 26).
 Then the author speaks about the everyday perception և the aesthetic perceptions of the writer that can sometimes transform the reality in such a way that that reality does not recognize itself.
Reality is not directly reflected in literature, but passes through the author's subconscious and imagination, acquires fiction. "If I did not want to, even they could not know themselves. In general, it would be impossible for them to guess who is who.
My perception of everyday life could also change, which later turned into an artistic flow ”(p. 27).
Then we see the writer in the story about Anna.
  Here is already one of the parts of the author's other novel, "King Arshak, Drastamat Nerkin", which, as the author does not hesitate to admit, is what և Anna's intermediate has.
 With that, he seems to socialize, simplify, enliven the scene of love that, while reading the historical novel, seems to come from afar, has a mysterious beauty in it.
Then the writer goes to the battlefield, becomes a soldier, equal to other soldiers, becomes an ordinary fighter, one who fights for life and existence.
 It is here that he says, "The true writer is always alone" (p. 40).
After returning from the war, the writer understands that such an intellectual has no place in a government made of variegated elements.
A new battle begins, the battle for existence in the homeland, no less cruel and sinful than the battle for the existence of the battlefield, perhaps even more shameful, which the author does not shy away from voicing.
 In order to cover the needs of the family for the publication of the book, the writer has to please the representatives of the government by all possible, impossible means, often he is dishonorable, "I used soap conveniently for the buttocks."
  Leaving his original work unsuccessful, he starts a new book, writing a screenplay not to create a fictional song, to say his word in literature, but to "snatch money from the Catholicos."
It is clear from the dreamy wanderings of the labyrinth that in the newly independent Armenia the writer had a primary, fatal task - to maintain his existence.
The next step is to speak about him through women.
 The first woman to talk about the writer Ona is Melan. "I do not like what you write, your image makes me sick" (p. 136).
 Through Melanie, he criticizes and even rejects the literature created by his writings. "You are a monopolist, works written with fanaticism cannot be good, they become dogma.
  If the critics are smart, they will see the inflexibility of what you have written, they are even worse ”(pp. 136, 137).
The novel ends with another letter from Onan's mistress, Elen, to her son.
With Yellen's last letter, he seems to be conducting a kind of literary study of the literature he has created.
 As unbelievably frank as the mother-son conversation in this letter may seem at first glance, which often seems unconvincing to literary critics, the point before the letter is to discuss a number of theoretical issues, at least through the conversation of Ellen's son.
 Maybe the letter does not stop being inorganic for the novel, but here our problem is different.
  The first task of the letter is to raise theoretical issues, to discuss, to give an unappreciated assessment of the literature of the new times, to summarize the generalized ideas about the writer and literature.
Addressing his son, Ellen immediately wrote that he was going to talk about someone whose works he չունեն did not have a positive opinion of his students, և immediately clarified that there was neither the node nor the system of academic literature in his works (p. 175).
  This is the first characteristic of Khechoyan's literature, but this is not only a characteristic feature of Khechoyan, it can be said that it is universal for modern և, especially postmodern literature.
 As he progresses, he, remembering his critics, writes that he is often accused of "successive chapters, lost rhythm, tasteless narration" (p. 175), immediately explaining it according to his aesthetic principles: "Life is manifested in his works. by understanding the subconscious mystery.
  Nor is it written with complete facts, so that it is possible to analyze them in detail ”(p. 175).
  Theoretically explaining the literature he created in the letter, Khechoyan does not give the flow of his well-known consciousness to his essay, but the flow of the state of mind, which is a literature without ideology, without pre-planned actions. "It is a closed one, about a seemingly complete time living in a system of helplessness, as if our minds are given the time to calculate the course of history, revolutionary events, outbreaks of war, the time of our death or birth. In fact, there is a cosmic time in which God kills people. ”- p. 176.
  On another occasion, he himself describes the flow of this state of mind. "It is never possible to express the flow of the sensory being in the form of a word" 1.
The word is the greatest weapon of the writer, the word is alive, the heart of the word beats, the same word lives differently in different writers, the word is not literature, but the word becomes literature. "The grammatical, orthographic structure of the word was heard with one sound in the dark of night, and with another in the light of day.
  That is why the attitude towards the word was not unambiguous, the word was alive inside him.
 "When the word breathes, so does the style," writes Yellen about Onan "(pp. 178, 179) (emphasis added).
Khechoyan compares the ability to write and engage in literature with echeology. "It is very possible that his madness is beyond the truth, which we are looking for" (p. 182).
  He then goes on to say in his essay The Iron Roads of Europe that only a madman can create true literature, underscoring Jung's teaching that works of art can only be created by people with nervous disorders.
 He also clarifies his ideas about the novel genre. "You have to be crazy to write nowadays, and if that disease is incurable, then you have to write in such a way that it does not fit into any program.
  The novel should not be retold, it should be published in the laws of joint plot action 1 Khechoyan L., June five-six, Yerevan, 2002, p. 121.
from the depths of the emotional present, searching for the color և its meaninglessness, the horse և its meaning, the emotional event աց ”1 (emphasis added: T. Ղ.).
Summing up what has been said, we can conclude that Khechoyan's novel, which is, in fact, a work written at first sight about the Artsakh war, came to answer the Armenian literature of the post-independence period, in particular, a number of questions related to the novel genre.
  In his novel, the writer provided solutions to the theoretical problems that literature faced և, answered the question of what literature should look like և, and realized them artistically in the same novel.
 "This book, a heavy beetle" became the 20th century. One of our best novels written at the end։, as such, can still be considered in the same line with the classics.
Taguhi GhazaryanWRITER'S IMAGE AND LITERATURE QUESTIONS LEVON KHECHOYAN'S NOVEL "BLACK BOOK, HEAVY BEET" Keywords: Book S, heavy beetle, Lon Khechoyan, writer, theoretical contemporary, aesthetic issues.
