FEATURES OF THE STORIES WRITTEN IN THE LATE PERIOD OF "SASNA TSRER" The epic was passed down from generation to generation, orally.
  The stories of the epic have not reached us in the same way.
 And during each narration, the narrators, forgetting something, added something and changed the novel.
 Thus, there are about 160 stories of different value of the novel, which are grouped according to 3 main typological groups: Moush, Mokats և Sasno.
We studied the late 1970s. then philologists A. The stories written by Sahakyan և S. Harutyunyan.
  We compared it with the stories written earlier1.
  For our study, it can be stated that each subsequent phase of the post recorded a decline compared to the previous one.
In addition to G. According to Srvandztyan, according to the evidence of further folklore gatherings, most of them said that they were the best novelists of their previous generations, who, according to them, knew 7 or 40 branches of the epic and told them for days.
There were almost no master-professional novelists. There were only a limited number of good novelists whose special occupation was not fiction.
The speakers are representatives of different occupations, different social strata, endowed with a natural ability to tell stories, which are told only due to circumstances, often with reminders of folklore gatherings.
In the latest records, with the exception of a few exceptions, verse verses and stable epic formulas are relatively lacking due to oblivion. Often only passages of verse are mentioned.
For the comparison of old and new stories we have chosen the natural birth of twin brothers, generational content (birth of a powerful heir), heroism (killing of a lion), cultural activity (establishment of a habitat), meeting of a hero և relative on the battlefield, hero հեր anti ահ hero fight, hero removal of the junior hero պայման condition of return և other motives, և, comparative examination of improvements 2.
Early written stories և Stories written in the late period, while preserving the familiar, traditional plot appearance of the novel, have lost something very important - the inner essence of the novel, have moved away from the genre description of the novel, have approached the genre of fairy tale.
  In other words, time has had its influence, ընթացքում People's attitude towards the novel has changed over time.
 Pa1 "Sasna Tsrer", Yerevan, 1977.
2 See H. Hambardzumyan, Typological groups of Sasna Tsrer stories and their features (abstract), Yerevan, 2008.
They have undergone internal changes related to the attitude of the speakers, their level of memory, the art of storytelling. often literacy prevented more direct (proper use of literary words, etc.).
Let us now turn to the examination of stories.
  It should be noted that the double entries from the same novel provide a great opportunity for comparisons, interesting traces, which we will refer to in the relevant section.
It is noteworthy that S. In Abajyan's story (Mush story) the motive of cultural activity (establishment of a place of residence) differs from the earlier recorded stories. In this story Sasun builds David 1, in contrast to the stories of Kronto պ Manuk Toroyan of Tarontsi, where Sasun builds Sanasar և Baghdasar.
It is interesting that, unlike the stories recorded earlier, MsraMelik fights with Little Mher instead of David2.
It is noteworthy that in this story we see only the fifth generation instead of the four generations of the epic. Little Mher has a child, with whom he fights in Tspan.
 In other words, Pokr Mher's branch is also the end of the novel in this version.
It is noteworthy that unlike other stories where the father adopts, S. In Abajyan's story, when Mher learns that he has killed his only son, he punishes himself. "- Let there be a yurt and condition for the next ass, Ertam," he said, "I will kill that song, I will kill Nakhrju's wife, I will go, I will say "Where will my tech come from?"
It is interesting that H. In Hakobyan's story, in the incident of the meeting between Msra Melik and Davit, they eat together for three days, then Davit says, "Msra Melik," he said, "I will go and bring my horse and tent. Until your enemy comes, we will fight."
As can be seen, in this story David is cunning, in contrast to the previous stories where Melik was cunning.
The fight is also presented in a different way. In Hakobyan's story.
 Here Msra Melik և David fight for three days until the evening.
 The first day "Fighting on a horse".
"They did not break each other until they made goulash in the evening.
He turned and went to rest for himself, Msra Melik went to rest for him ”5.
In the morning they decide to fight in another way - "Let's cheat the sword".
  Three times Melik comes to David, but nothing happens to David, and David gives two blows to Msra Melik's mother և sister, but with a third blow he defeats Melik6.
1 See "Sasna Tsrer", vol. G, Yerevan, 1979, cover Z, page 204.
2 See ibid., P. 239.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Ibid., P. 387.
5 In the same place.
6 Ibid., Pp. 388-389.
It is noteworthy that according to Torgom Sargsyan's story, David's father is not Mets Mher, but Sanasar: "աս Sanasar leaves ալի A boy is born, they name him David՜" 1.
David's son Mher marries Deghdzun Jam, they have a son named Little Mher.
  In other words, in this version of the epic, the sequence of generations is broken: Sanasar և Baghdasar-David-Mher-Little Mher.
Gideon Davtyan's story is interesting in that after Mher's death Msra Melik attacks Sasun և David is taken prisoner.
  Melikimayr sees what a beautiful child she is, she wants to keep herself. "I will run away from this child."
 In contrast to the old recorded stories, in particular, the story of Manuk Toroyan, where after Mher's death Uncle Toros sends him to David.
The story of Zohrab Avetisyan from Norbayazet begins with the Sanasar-Baghdasar branch, but without mentioning the names of the Armenian and idolatrous kings and the twins, the branch of Mher և Pokr Mher is not told.
  According to the story, Mher is David's uncle.
 The episodes of Mets Mher's novel were told about Sanasariverabila.
  For example, when Sanasar goes to the Copper City to take the king's daughter's wife, և he must kill the dragon, the words of Mher Mher, who killed a lion, are attributed to Sanasar. "He says, 'Is the man eating separately or approaching?'
- No, it gets close, it spoils.
"All right," he says, "I will go in the morning."
Or, "Sanasar says, 'Well, I'm just satisfied.'
It reaches, I plunder it with one hand, one with it, It weighs, it tears, They plunder it with one piece, They plunder it with one piece ”4.
The story stands out with its solid internal structure and pictorial style.
Let us now turn to the stories of the Mokats typological group.
  It is noteworthy that in the later recorded stories only mention is made of those whose previous narrators sang some passages, which is not typical of the later Mokats stories.
Rasho Jaloyan's story is characterized by song parts, traditional short illustrations and formulas.
  The story was first recorded in 1933. Published by Karapet Melik-Ohanjanyan in Volume A of the "Sasnatsrer" collection.
  The second story is interesting as if it were the second registration from the same team, after a 50-year break.
The story is especially remarkable in that the first record covers only the second (Great Mher) և third (David) branches, and the second record is an almost literal reproduction of the same, the additional first և fourth branches.
1 "Sasna Tsrer", story 12, page 464.
2 Ibid., P. 55.
3 Ibid., P. 148, p.
4 Ibid., P. 559.
In fact, the second registration proves the tradition of the story.
The title is from the novel "Sasna Tavt's kekat".
It is interesting that only in this version Msramelik's mother has a dream - she tries to forbid her son to go "against Sasma." - "I had a nightmare. Sasma was a kite, Msra kite was full of blood.
I will tell you, they will go to the dungeon… »1.
The hero of the fourth branch in Rasho Jaloyan's story is David's son Hakob.
David had instructed the Khandut khanum that if a boy was born, his band would be tied.
"I do not know, Tavit married, how many years did not come, Twenty years, how many… He came, because children will play near the city. The children all ran away, a giant man, Hakob, they say Mher, Hakob with old books. ”2
Mher's branch in Tovmas Sargsyan's story is a complete fairy tale. As in fairy tales, so here we see the angel-devil contrast.
  Thus, the angel informs Mher that he must "kill all the deer" and the country will remain in Mher's hands.
  He massacres everyone, only Bagbaganov is left.
 Mher fights with him for three days and three nights, the old mother pours dust and ashes under her feet, and "fills a bucket with soap" under Mher's feet.
 Despite all this, Mher wins. "The world will no longer be a competitor, Mheritem."
  Then the devil deceives Mher and incites him against the god.
 But Mher's power is diminishing.
 The angel descends from the sky, fights with Mher և wins.
 Then Mher hangs from the rock and curses: "You will not die, Tu asu khet racer.
It hangs on a stone just like that, it stays like that ”3.
Marta Pirumyan's story is also interesting.
  Martha's story is notable for its stable epic formulas, traditional verse passages, and song samples (John և David's farewell, the incident of cutting the steel pillar), with a pronounced rhyme.
  The story stands out with its tradition, epic details, but with very lively feelings.
There is no image of an old counselor in this story, and when David and Msramelik meet, David says the following: "Melik, we are brothers, give vain to the poor people, to the poor and the poor, to the poor and needy, and you will fight for David."
He said, "Let us fight according to the law. Whoever violated here, let him defeat, only by law."
1 "Sasna Tsrer", story D, page 140.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Ibid., P. 79.
As we see, in this version David tries to persuade Msramelik not to massacre the innocent people in vain.
  It comes from the gender of the speaker, from the approach.
 The female narrators of the novel are more emotional, դեպքում even in the case of negative characters, the attitude is milder.
 In my opinion, the mother instinct speaks there.
A unique version is M. Pirumyan's story. Here Big Mher is introduced as Little Mher. "Sanasar, Baghdasar ohch Mher's parent iler.
Ghoch Mher also passed, Psti Mher is the son of Ghoch Mher… »2.
And in Sasno's stories many unreal, fairy-tale-themed accents have an emphasis, even the extraordinary, the exceptional.
  The story of Khachatur Haroyan ("David's fight") is not complete, only Davtichyugh is told, with reductions.
 The main part is the question and answer of the speaker։.
 According to the writers, the novelist testified that he had seen "The Stone of Jealousy". "Timon used to say that the village of Tsakhrag should be built by Tavit" 3.
The murder of David is also noteworthy in this story. Davit is killed by his Iranian-born son, and we see a different picture with Tamo Davtyan. David is killed by the daughter of Chmshik Sultan թի David (story C, page 141).
In Khachatur Hovhannisyan's story: "Gert goes to the border. It goes to the border. It goes to the border. In the chayri… She stayed, she developed Tavit from the killer… ”(story Y, p. 254).
A new story was written by Zakar Martirosyan entitled "David of Sassoun".
 The story begins with a brief mention of the names of the heroes, the song of David's exploits is narrated.
  The story is characterized by the rapid course of events.
Here is the episode of Msramelik և David և's fight: "Take a little breath, sleep there. Sleep with a sigh, go away. Again, again, we were in a fight.
Գըսե. "My dream!"
"I will not sleep, we were still fighting" (story 11, p. 287).
It is interesting that the narrator added at the end that David built Sasun, Diyarbakir, "Maratug". "Tavit gdre zkirre, sun drer v san san - san-sun.
Աթ Maratug himself made it ”(story 11, p. 290).
It is noteworthy that in Sasna stories there is a certain tendency to connect the construction theme mainly with the image of David.
1 "Sasna Tsrer", story C, page 122.
2 Ibid., P.
3 "Sasna Tsrer", Yerevan, 1999, vol. D, cover H, pp. 255-256.
 From now on, the pages of the quotations from volume D ները the numbers of the stories will be mentioned in brackets.
Sargis Safaryan's story describes all the branches in detail.
The story of Mher's death is also told.
 It is noteworthy that the Great Mher asked God to give him a son: "եր He cried day and night, he said: God, you know my child, - Mher.
God said, "Mher, will I kill your child? You, your wife, will die."
He said, "Death is the thirtieth, let me have a child, let me die" (story 14, p. 343).
The story of Genjo Grigoryan ("The Story of David of Sassoun") is also noteworthy.
 It should be noted that the novelist G. A double note was made from Grigoryan.
 The story of 1969 stands out with the abundance of additional motives and incidents1.
It is interesting that unlike the previously recorded Sasna stories, particularly T. Davtyan իս Misak Hovhannisyan's stories, this story's uncle Toros is present during David և Melik's fight, who threatens to cut Davit into two equal halves, otherwise he will "cut off David's head". Let there be a true song of the day, Let there be a night, Let there be a mead, let there be a tit, Let there be your head ”(story 16, p. 386).
This is where David is locked up in a cave, not Pokr Mher, David's son. "Gik goes to the mountain of Zmmaka." in the middle.
From the top of that tree, the place is full of giku. Gsin is the weight of the sea ”(story 16, p. 387).
Thus, in this story, the branch of David is the end of the novel.
It is interesting that the novel from the same novelist was written in 1939 և 1971, that is, a double note was made.
 The same novelist, Misak, has different surnames. In one case he took his father's name as a surname - Hovhannisyan, in the other case - his grandfather - Haroyan.
The difference between the two stories told by Misak starts from the bibliography. In the first post, two branches: (Mher) - David, and in the second post, four branches: (S և B) - (Mher) - David - (Mher).
  The concept of four branches, however, is relative. The names Sanasar and Baghdasar were added, because the twin brothers became the owners of the incident of finding water and building a fortress at its source, which is attributed to Mets Mher in the first post.
In fact, the first branch of the second post was compiled with this one incident.
 The fourth branch is a disturbed memory, rather than a fictional story, awakened in response to folklore inquiries.
1 See "Sasna Tsrer", vol. D, Comparative examination of Sasna stories, pp. 43-46.
The second post lacks powerful motives and incidents, such as David's construction work, which are so special in Sasno's stories, David's assassination, Vego's offer to Khandut after David's death, Khandut's suicide, Khandut's twin breasts are so common.
It is noteworthy that in one case Misak can tell the story of David driving in the field after the incident of harassment, in the other case, before the incident of the precedent. In one case, in order to show David's strength, he could describe in detail his sevenfold shrinkage of his clothes, in the other case, he would be satisfied with the phrase "If he was big, he became ten".
It is interesting that there are incidents that are missing from the second post, such as Mher is from Karabakh, Mher is childless, Halivor's prediction, etc.
Many incidents occur during the second post. David's son's name was David, the boy was stronger than David. David is kind, the boy is cruel.
 The people beg him to be destroyed և etc.
And the story titled "David of Sassoun" written by Sargis Avagyan is characterized by a prose narration.
 It is interesting that S. A double note was made from Avagyan.
 The second post completely lacks the additional motives and incidents built with them that exist in Gr. In Grigoryan's post.
According to 1969 According to the post, the novel has three branches: first, second, third, with extensive incidents in those branches. At the time of writing, there were four branches, very brief, especially the branch of Little Mher, which consists of two parts: the battle of David և Mher, the killing of David by his son և the closing of Mher in stone.
The branch of David is also incomparably brief.
 The narrative style of the second post is generally devoid of any imagery.
Especially the first և fourth branches are subject to changes in the stories.
  All four branches of the original source may be preserved, but a leaflet.
 Zakar Martirosyan և Harutyun Martirosyan's stories have all four branches, but the first, second and fourth branches are not complete. In the form of (S) B - (Mher) - David - (Mher).
It is interesting that Nure Davtyan heard from Tamo four branches with extensive incidents.
  However, he told only two branches (Sanasar-Baghdasar) - David.
The story is short, the degree of incomprehensibility is brief. One unfamiliar with the content of the novel can hardly assume a long, complete story under its narration.
  As noted by the philologist A. Sahakyan: "Story with essays, with conditional guidelines for incidents.
  If the bases are opened and detailed, they will become widespread incidents of other stories. ”1
Ն. Davtyan's story is not only short, but also short. Nure places the extensive incidents of Melik's mobilization, agreeing on the order of the fight with David, throwing David's father in 9 short lines, or the incident of the fight between David and Melikim, at his mother's request, in 11 lines.
According to A. Sahakyan's narrative style with "word-bases" is typical of female philologists.
 The story of female philologists is short and novel.
1 "Sasna Tsrer", vol. D, page 66.
Thus, studying the stories written in the late period, we came to the following conclusions. Over time, the epic ceased to exist, the narrators forgot a lot;
The volume of the novel has changed, the details are missing, the stories are presented briefly, that is why many incidents are presented in one sentence or with a short memory.
As we have already mentioned, the four-branch system of the epic is mostly absent in the later written stories, mainly the championship of one central character is emphasized, to which the incidents about another hero are attributed.
The attitude towards the novel has changed (from epic to fairy tale).
 In the early Mokats stories, the heroes of the epic were perceived as ancestors. The stories were mainly spiced with "Mercy".
  And in later notes the epic is told as a fairy tale.
The narrators in the later written stories, mainly not being master novelists, told some parts of the epic after the polls, in that case we are already dealing not with the epic, but with another genre, the tradition.
Lusine Harutyunyan FEATURES OF THE STORIES WRITTEN IN THE LATE PERIOD OF "SASNA TSRER" Keywords: Sasna Tsrer, Moush story, Mokats story, Sasno story, written in the late period, motive, narrator.
