Islam, as one of the largest religious-political systems in the world, from the very beginning of its emergence has manifested unique systemic qualities, which are the main interrelationships of the Islamic society's worldview, religious ideas, domestic and foreign policy, socio-economic relations, life, culture, legal consciousness, family. .
 The origins of the processes taking place in the Islamic society are hidden in the peculiarities dating back to the time of Muhammad.
 20th century The "Islamic explosion" that erupted in the second half of the twentieth century, which was never predicted by scholars and politicians, once again reminded the world that religions have not left the active stage of the world and continue to be influential political factors in the modern world.
  Their manifestations require a thorough, comprehensive analysis, և one should not rush և to give categorical assessments of their role, reduction of influence և development prospects, even after the scientific-technical-bourgeois-democratic revolutions that brought completely different qualities to humanity.
The "Islamic explosion" with its various manifestations and various developments cannot be taken into the whole field of study, to give an unequivocal assessment.
  Of course, the events taking place in different Islamic countries are interrelated, but completely different և contradictory.
  It is undeniable that the Islamic world is one of the most explosive and conflict-ridden regions on the planet.
  It should be noted that after World War II, until the 1990s, 40 of the 120 armed conflicts in the world, or about 33%, were related to the Middle East1.
 Add to that the many acts of terrorism, the complex integration process, the revival of fundamentalist movements, the rise of Islamic socialism, the Islamic Revolution in Iran, the use of Islam in the counter-revolutionary struggle, the "fire" that has spread like wildfire in our day.
Naturally, the above-mentioned processes, unresolved conflicts turning into bloody wars, political shifts have their internal socio-political reasons, interrelated with foreign interventions, challenges, political, economic (energy) interests of the superpowers, and various other factors, but these problems are directly or indirectly related. և with historical development and religious peculiarities.
  They are based on the postulates of religion, because Islam is a coil of unresolved conflicts and conflicts within itself.
In order to analyze the process and origins of the various manifestations of world religions, it is necessary to take into account one important circumstance. Religions are based primarily on the activities of the people who's crucial in their emergence and development, that is, on the life of their founders, and not, as many scholars have previously thought, on the basis of the whole of this or that process.
  In Christianity, this image is Jesus of Nazareth, in Buddhism, Siddhartha Gautama, and in Islam, Muhammad bin Abdullah.
It is not surprising at all that in the 21st century. In a number of Eastern countries, we meet millions of Muslims who try to imitate Muhammad in their behavior.
  Without taking this key factor into account, many wonder why the whole of Islamic society is in a state of general hysteria when it comes to making caricatures of the Prophet in Denmark or making a film in the United States that mocks a person based on about 1.5 The faith and life of billions of people, and the religion he founded has become for them for centuries the main companion of life, a way of thinking, a way of working, the hope of justice in this life, salvation in the afterlife.
Let us try to classify the systemic features typical of Islam.
  First of all, one must distinguish totalitarianism or totalitarianism, which presupposes the purity of the ummah, strict control over each of its members.
 Before addressing the various manifestations of this phenomenon, let us draw some comparative parallels with the other major religious system, Christianity, which is one of the most important aspects of reaching a final conclusion.
  Unlike Islam, Christianity was established as one of the largest state formations in the distant dominions of the Roman Empire, and in later years spread like wildfire to all its provinces, eventually triumphing and becoming the dominant religion.
 And Islam, being created in the Arabian Peninsula, quite far from the "civilized world", united the whole peninsula into a strong state formation.
 The fanatical armies imbued with his ideas broke the stereotypes of Alexander the Great under the banner of Ghazavat, the sacred war of war.
 If in Christianity power is divided between the secular and the caring, then in Islam there is no such division.
  The caliph, as Muhammad's successor on earth, was both the head of state and the holder of supreme supreme authority.
  The main reason why Islam, unlike Christianity, is a weakly institutionalized system is the fact that the secular authorities are not divided.
All these arguments clearly show that the life of the society, the domestic and foreign policy of the state since the time of Muhammad were based on the basic tenets of Islam, the laws established by Sharia, which automatically creates a totalitarian system, and Christianity with its institutions (church) separate. It is clearly separated from the state by the system, that is, it is largely a state within a state; if necessary, it can oppose secular power.
  The reality of authoritarian systematization of Christianity is not difficult to notice if we pay attention to the church-believers relationship.
  The first. The believer's participation in the religious ceremonies performed by the church depends on his will, moreover, he can leave the church without obstacles.
Thus, the church has no control over the life, behavior or conduct of the believers, and the believer, being a sinner, can receive forgiveness at the end of his life and go to heaven.
  Although throughout history the Catholic Church has made practical attempts to create a totalitarian system, and the state authorities have tried to make the church dependent, but these processes, having met with sharp opposition from each other, have failed.
Nowadays, the relations between the church and the state are regulated by laws, excluding their convergence.
  The opposite is true in Islam. It is supposed to be a tough review of everyone, which is even done at the level of high-ranking state officials.
 For example, in 1981 Egyptian President Anwar Sadat was assassinated during a military parade on October 6, 2006 after Sheikh Omar Abdel Rahman declared a fatwa against him for his apostasy.
 This terrorist act, which was carried out by the "Jihad" religious-political organization, is mainly explained by the harsh policy of the previous president Gamal Abdel Nasser, which started with the religious-political organizations.
  An assassination attempt on Nasser was once organized by the Muslim Brotherhood.
Sadat's assassination was due to his special policy towards the Coptic Christians in Egypt, the dialogue with Israel, which was perceived by Islamic fundamentalists as apostasy, the expulsion from Islam.
 Such acts are sufficient to imagine the involvement of the above-mentioned control.
As for the control of the members of the Ummah, it is clearly exercised through Sharia, which is a whole system of Muslims' religious duties, way of life, conduct, actions, certain legal norms, principles.
 It regulates and clarifies the life of every Islam.
  According to the Shari'a, it means to live a true life that leads a Muslim to God դր to paradise.
 And indeed, "Sharia" literally means a path, which is located in the desert, leads to the well, and to deviate from it means to get lost, to die of thirst and lack of water.
 Of course, one can understand what it means for the desert dwellers to be without water.
Sharia is considered to be a divine law given to people by the Qur'an, hadiths and other religious authorities.
 In fact, Sharia is embodied through fiqh (Islamic law) և practically through Muslim or Sharia courts2.
  And the main attention is paid to the permissibility or prohibition of this or that action.
 The main problems of Shari'a are regulated by fiqh, which deals with the interpretation and interpretation of its laws, and serves as a basis for evaluating people's actions, as well as for distinguishing between good and bad deeds.
  Because Shari'ah and Jupiter are inextricably linked, these two terms are often equated.
The Shari'ah regulates the external relations of people with Allah (ummah laws - ibadat), the relations of people with each other (muamalayat), distinguishes the punishments for their transgressions (ukubat).
  As we have mentioned, Shari'ah is only a way of external behavior leading people to Allah, and the way of inner, caring behavior is considered to be Tariqah, which leads to Allah through the ecstasy of mystical self-thought, that is, tasawwuf1.
  The implementation of Sharia և fiqh is carried out through ulema (Imam, faqih, mufti, qadi), who are considered to be experts in Islamic theology and religious law.
  They have a great influence on the society, they are considered to be the defenders of the faith, they are able to form public opinion, they often manipulate the public mood.
 Despite the significant differences between the institute of Imamate in the two directions of Islam, it is these ulema who exercise strict control over society, and if we add to them the fact of control over each member of society, then the totalitarian system is almost realized.
 First of all, it should be noted that three times a person who is absent from Friday prayers is expelled from the community, and every Islam believer considers it his duty to defend his faith to check whether his neighbor prays in the morning or not, does he not break the fast of Ramadan or fasting.
  And if so, then he can not but comment on his behavior, as he may be expelled from the community.
 And to remove him from the community means to exclude him from contact with other members, to prevent economic activity, that is, the individual is isolated from society, and if it turns out that he has left Islam, for example, to convert to Christianity, the verdict is final - the death penalty.
  Unlike Christianity, every Islamist is considered a religious preacher, and in prayer they are led by the elder.
 Thus, every Muslim is obliged to pray five times a day, fast during the month of Ramadan, not to miss the main Friday prayers, or to follow Islamic laws and traditions, otherwise he may be executed either on the spot with the help of public forces or by a special execution.
One of the systemic qualities of Islam is propaganda aggression, which has been accompanied by military aggression at different stages of its historical development, and these two important guidelines have been the cornerstones of the spread and development of Islam.
 And it is not accidental that from the very beginning of its formation it went through the most brutal wars, spreading the faith by the power of the sword.
  If we look at the issue from a religious point of view, none of the anti-world religions can be based on the hatred of blood, revenge, but in the case of Islam, this most important circumstance 1 Negry L., Islam.
 short case law, Moscow, 1986, p. 123. There are also no less important principles, which often directly contradict the above-mentioned principle and undermine the "extreme humanitarian" nature of Islam.
 First of all, religion can not be separated from the political, social, socio-economic realities of its emerging and spreading regions, and Islam was the main guiding ideology ավորման the unification of different tribes of the endless Arabian Peninsula և the creation of a powerful state։.
  The emergence of Islam in that historical period was not a coincidence, but a simple historical regularity, that is, the peninsula, which was experiencing socio-economic prosperity and needed political unification and formation, naturally needed a state-building ideology, which in that period could only be religious in the region.
It is not that this process was expressed only with the emergence of Islam.
  The preconditions existed much earlier, որոշակի some attempts were even made to unite the island under the banner of this or that deity.
  But Muhammad was destined to lead that process.
 His success must be seen in the presence of a phenomenon that had a decisive influence on the course of human history և the further development, that is, the coincidence of circumstances that saved Muhammad's more than 23 years of failed career նախ prepared the ground for the further spread իս development of Islam.
If Christianity created non-institutional structures in almost all the territories of the empire, which, due to about 300 years of dynamic propaganda, persistent and uncompromising struggle, were able to conquer the whole empire, the propaganda of de-Islam was manifested in completely different qualities.
  Muhammad's sermons in Mecca and Medina, where he was already endowed with the highest political and legal power, are clearly different.
  If in Mecca he preached to return to the monotheistic faith, to renounce vices, 1 in Medina, he used other propaganda technologies after taking control of the Jewish's other's monolithic barriers.
  The Islamic Ummah, becoming the largest dictatorial force on the peninsula of the peninsula, is already using a policy of pressure and ultimatums or successful military operations to spread Islam, which became the mainstay of the spread of Islam after the death of Muhammad.
 These pressures were conditioned by the absolute intolerance towards the non-believers of the peninsula, especially the cultists.
 They had to convert to Islam or be put to the sword.
 It was accompanied by political and religious pressures, that is, Muslims living in the same city; representatives of other religions were not endowed with equal religious, legal, economic, political rights, which were severely limited or completely violated.
 The special tax policy towards Islam, not Islam, is remarkable.
These aggressive approaches to propaganda would have lost their effectiveness if it were not for the military force factor.
 Suffice it to say that Muhammad united most of the Terakzu with the help of military force, and after his death the famous military commander Khalid bin al-Walid's successful military operations during the Ar-Rida civil war against the leader of the Muhammadan regime դեմ against tribes 1.
 Later, Islam successfully spread along with the infinite conquests carried out by the caliphs, and its strengthening and rooting was ensured by the religious, ritual, domestic and legal norms created by Muhammad and developed by the successors of his successors.
  But the penetration of conquest invasions և the penetration of a given religious, cultural political system into the conquered societies will turn into a process detached from logic, if we do not take into account a number of important features.
 Islam, as a world religion, is endowed with universal features, for example, in the Qur'an we will never find a verse that appeals to the Arabs, on the contrary, Muhammad's direct or indirect sermons concern humanity, the spread of Islam becomes a priority, which leads to jihad. to the fanatical armies under the banner of spreading Islam throughout the world with the "supernatural help and support."
  The synthesis of these three value system ideas realizes the ideological basis of military-political achievements and drives success.
  In addition, the universal ability of world religions to adapt and penetrate rapidly in different societies must be taken into account.
Karpis Pashoyan SYSTEMATIC HISTORICAL QUALITIES OF ISLAM Keywords: Islamic world, Arab Spring, Muhammad bin Abdullah, totalitarianism, authoritarianism, Muslim Brotherhood, jihad, Sharia, Qur'an, Sunnah, fiqh, military.
