Mankind has always been interested in the secret of longevity and staying young forever.
  Longevity is defined as people who reach the age of 90 ՝ maintaining good health.
 Throughout human history, life expectancy has increased.
  The average life span of XIV-XVII centuries was 24-29 years, XIX century. in the last European countries - 42 years, and in the XX century. in the second half, more than 70 years.
 Man has achieved all this through the treatment of infectious diseases, the improvement of prophylactic measures and the improvement of living conditions.
Aging is a biological pattern inherent in every living thing.
  Aging begins gradually, naturally, regularly, hereditaryly գործընթաց is a process depending on geosocial conditions, characterized by a weakening of vital functions, systemic structural and functional disorders of various organs [1].
  Aging is a long-term, slow-growing multifocal process, when with the changes in the nutrition of organs and tissues, new adaptive mechanisms appear in the organism, which ensure the existence of the organism in the given conditions, knowledge of its development patterns, mechanisms to objectively assess the causes of diseases.
  Diseases such as hypertension, hardening of blood vessels, ischemic heart disease, diabetes, cancer, which mainly occur in the second half of human life, are often associated with aging.
  Aging is a degenerative process that develops with age as a result of the harmful effects of exogenous endogenous factors that contribute to the failure of physiological functions.
  With age, the functional characteristics of the organism decrease, the adaptive abilities of the organism decrease, which lead to the occurrence of diseases, increase the probability of death.
  Often a person dies not from old age, but from diseases and infections caused by a decrease in the body's resistance [1, 2].
 The causes of death of modern man are chronic non-communicable diseases - atherosclerosis, hypertension, which are associated with ischemic heart disease, myocardial infarction, hemorrhage in the brain, malignancies.
  Infectious diseases such as influenza, tuberculosis, etc. have a significant impact.
Most people try to live a long, full life, but few manage to reach old age and longevity while maintaining an active lifestyle.
  Modern scientists believe that modern man has the opportunity to live up to 120 years.
There are longevity in all countries of the world, but there is no common opinion or miracle prescription about this phenomenon yet.
Purpose of the work և problems.
 The goal is to reveal a number of factors contributing to longevity in Lori region.
 The task is to find out the sex ratio of the number of long-lived people, the lifestyle of the long-lived, diet, hereditary background, marital status, temperament, length of service, education և profession, presence of harmful habits, daily routine, frequency of medical services, preferences, etc.
  The task of our work is to find out the ratio of the number of long-lived people in the cities and villages of Lori region.
The process of work.
  To solve these problems, use the modified methods of interviewing (filling in the questionnaire) և conversation.
 The survey was conducted with 120 long-lived people (women and men) aged 90-103 in a number of villages and towns of Lori region.
  16 questions were included in the questionnaire.
  In order to verify the data, a separate survey was conducted with the relatives of the victims.
The answers to the questions were subjected to statistical analysis.
The survey was conducted according to the following questionnaire: Name _____________ Surname _______________ Nickname ________________ Gender: male □ female օր Date of birth Place, month of birth Place of residence Family status Diet Harmful habits Problems of the day ռեժիմNaturity րEducation աժEducation (medicine) Lifestyle և preferences Work outcomes և analysis.
  According to the results of the work, in Lori region, the long-lived make up 0.5% of the total population, of which 71.92% are women and 28.08% are men.
 According to our research, 85% of long-lived women were widowed very early, had many children.
 Only 30% of long-lived people have hereditary predispositions, 60% follow a strict diet, strict eating and sleeping regime, they are "larvae" in nature. They wake up early and go to bed.
  The vast majority of long-lived people who took part in the survey are underage and like to walk a lot.
 85% of long-lived people are free from harmful habits.
  They prefer home-made distilled vodka, which is usually consumed in limited quantities every day.
 The fact has not been fully explained yet.
Only 2% of long-lived men smoke.
 Longevity is influenced by marital status by 10%.
90.5% of the long-lived do not use medical services, do not trust doctors and medicines.
  Among the health problems are mainly hypertension and various types of joint pain.
Only 15% of the long-lived people we studied have secondary education.
 5% have higher education.
 The others are just literate.
During the study we found out the fact that in Lorumarz the first in the number of long-lived people is Jiliza village - 0.8%, in the second place - Shamut village - 0.7%, then - Odzun - 0.6%, Margahovit - 0.4%.
  In Vanadzor city the long-lived people make 0.5%.
 It is also interesting that some districts of the city, particularly the district adjacent to Manushyan Street, are significantly ahead of the others in the number of long-lived people.
According to our assumptions, this circumstance is conditioned by the composition of the water supplied to the district, the density of conifers and other tree species.
 This fact still needs to be studied comprehensively.
The least number of long-lived people live in Spitak - 0.1%, which is due to 1988. with many victims of the catastrophic earthquake.
 90% of long-lived people have a lively character, like to communicate with young people, are optimistic about life. Basically kind և tolerant attitude towards relatives.
It is noteworthy that 45% of long-lived people in Lori region were born in winter.
Conclusion.
  After analyzing the results of the work, we came to the conclusion that the hereditary preconditions are not enough to live a long, healthy life.
  There are many factors, the most important of which are the environment, moderation in food, cheerfulness, avoidance of harmful habits, positive attitude towards life։ tolerant attitude towards relatives.
  Given the demographic processes, further research is needed.
Literature 1. Minasyan S., Adamyan J., Sargsyan N., Human Physiology, Yerevan, 2007, p. 540.
Ani Davitavyan DISCOVERY OF A NUMBER OF FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO Longevity IN LORI REGION Keywords: longevity, lifestyle, daily routine, heredity.
