GRABARYAN AND WORLD LINGUISTIC LAYERS IN HAKOB KARNETSI "OVERVIEW OF THE UPPER ARMENIAN" TWO HUMILITY SYSTEM 17th c. The work of the chronicler Hakob Karnetsi "Topograph of the Upper Armenians" is a prehistoric original.
 It is not a purely historical work, but it contains data that relate not only to Karin և its surroundings, but also to the wars and destructive raids organized by Ottoman Turkey.
Studying Hakob Karnetsi's "Topography of the Upper Armenian" from the point of view of linguistic peculiarities, in this work we will separate the Grabarian և world-Arabic linguistic layers in the system of bowing of the song.
Early secular is a unique period of development of our language, it has its own peculiarities, which are present in the system of bowing of the song, mixed with the Grabar realities.
 17-18th centuries The world language has appeared in different forms by different authors.
 Sometimes the elements of Old Armenian prevailed, sometimes the patterns of some dialect, sometimes the patterns of Middle Armenian.
During its development, the Armenian language has somewhat simplified the multiplicity of the system of humility.
  The Grabar conjugation system consists of four conjugations: -a, -i, -e, -u, (o-only in the barn verb), the present և perfect bases, which formed the eight main verbs of the three seasons.
  During the further development of the Armenian language, the system of humiliation underwent changes, gaining a new image.
 The system of humility of the language of the work we have studied has some peculiarities in the Grabar և totality of world's world realities։.
When examining the conjugation system of Hakob Karnetsi's "Topography of the Upper Armenian", we have singled out several groups.
 First, let's talk about derbies.
 As we know, in the grammar of Grabar there are four derivations: indefinite, aparni, past և subjunctive (present).
 In the language of the song, the derby system is mainly Grabar.
  The past derby has an absolute predominance.
  The use of the indefinite article is not frequent, which is mostly found in the practical case.
  The subordinate verb is less used.
  Since the author tells about the events that have already taken place, we do not notice the use of aparniderba.
Let us present a statistical picture of the use of derbies, which will help to get a better idea of ​​the systemic grabar layer of the bow.
  We have included only the indefinite past participles in the table, as we have considered the subjunctive verbs that have not been used as nouns (case of jour-1).
 Past-indefinite verbs are distributed as follows: past-definite verbs Now let's look at the bowed horses.
  The system of bowing includes all the simple Grabarian tenses, except the imperative imperative.
 The following tenses are proved from the compound tenses: preposition-present tense, for example, built (9), decorated (10), said (12), etc. էին were housed (22), entered (32) և etc., be present borderline composed of verbs, for example, be terrified (27), be scattered (40), be fed (40) և etc.
  We did not find examples of the use of other compound tenses.
  Below we present the statistical picture of the use of the first, second aprons, the original և barrier orders, also the preposition-present present, preposition-preposition past tense: the first preposition, the second preposition, the past participle, the past participle, the past participle, the past participle, the past participle Their use, of course, has a very high frequency.
 Compared to them, the lower use of the first and second aparnes testifies to the internal process of the development of the Armenian language, outside the Old Armenian, to the secular linguistic environment.
 It is interesting to note that the first and second aprons of the subordinate method were very few, but to some extent used, while they should have been completely eliminated.
  Some of the preserved eggs can simply be considered Old Armenian.
  And the fact that the imperative imperative was not used at all is already a world-wide reality.
 The Grabarian imperative imperative or the apostrophe of the imperative mood was translated in the world language by the obligatory, conditional, compulsory apostrophes, sometimes by imperative.
  In the imperative imperative tense, the intransitive verb և և passive ջ received the suffixes -jir, -jik, and the mixed conjugation verbs -jir, -ijik.
  There is no use of imperative imperative tense in both. it is not included in the system of conjugation of the language of the song at all.
In the system of conjugation of the language of Hakob Karnetsi's "Topography of the Upper Armenian" we have a wide range of non-Grabar realities, in which the conjugated forms of a number of verbs include also parts.
  Let's take examples that point to the verbal realities of the world.1. Եւ. Եւ be very appetizing և amazing cheese to be served in Istanbul ր Arzrumpasha salt երս. (13), 2. … .Soka kulnun gineav, with grapes և olives և with all fruits… .3. 4. The Turks or the Armenian peasant Kurds or the peasants from the village come to complain, temporarily kill him or take him out of his province, take him from the fortress, take over his power, or take control of others. …. 5. ոչ .no one can act against the order. or to judge, to judge, to judge, to judge, to toast (25), 6. … .There is no other way, the king or the vizier will make manzul և another pashaikuta city…. (26), 7. Four or five Armenians to go to Istanbul to complain, soon his head…. (26), 8. "If a man falls into the midst of a war, he will be enlisted in Istanbul." (28), 9. …. They ruled over Abyssinia as far as the land of Yaman, where Urgahfan lived (/ 28), 10. … .Because the ruler can keep everything without a fortress, he can put one finger in the pocket, he can put it in the cup (29), 11. "If the land of Jerusalem had been divided into twelve kingdoms, it would have given it to a small king." (29). and he gave it to a small pasha…. (29). and he gave it to a small pasha…. (29).
12. և .և greatness of these two rules of the psalm hardly surround…. (31), 13. … .There are so many springs in the fortress, when they come out they take them to the mill (31), 14. Then we did not care so much about taking the dress, but we understood that it was not a bad habit of the Ottoman government to make the landlord show us the one who felt you, so that we might come to haq (56), 15. He said, "If I owe them anything, whether in the mountains or in any other province, I will not kill you instead of them." (56), 16. And he began to say to one another, "What thieves have been created, that this church will do this, that we are open." (57), 17. You sing all the hymns in two lessons և every other house…. (60-61).
At first glance, the presence of k-k particles may make the reader think that they are connected with the Karno dialect, as Hakob Karnetsi was from Karin.
 It should be noted that in the Carno dialect, the present and past participle of the border are formed by the particle համապատասխան corresponding to the participle of the past participle, but that particle is placed after the vowel verb, the vowel beginning with the vowel k or c is taken from the beginning, for example, կղնիմը, կոդեմկ 1, etc.
  And A. Gharibyan mentions that in the case of verbs beginning with a vowel, the participle is placed before the verb և at the same time, expressing the idea of ​​continuity, moreover, it is placed before the singular verbs, and then after 2.
  There is no such regularity in the above-mentioned forms.
  Therefore, it is difficult to see traces of Carno dialect in the above-mentioned horses.
  In this case we are mainly dealing with the ku particle.
  It is a Middle Armenian language, which, according to the principle mentioned earlier, has been transferred to the world class.
 A. Aytyanyan called this part "amazing" in the exam grammar.
 According to H. Acharyan, the first evidence of the ku particle was given in the 12th century, in particular, Mkhitar Heratsi has two uses: ku comes, ku will be.
 Later, in the Cilician period, it became a common reality for the authors3.
 Page 1 Mkrtchyan H., The Carno dialect, Yerevan, 1952, p. 70.
2 Gharibyan A., Armenian dialectology, Yerevan, 1952, pp. 409-410.
3 Acharyan H., Complete grammar of the Armenian language, vol. IV A, Yerevan, 1989, p. 389.
The composition of the present և past imperfect tenses of the manic season is considered in Armenian linguistics as a distinguishing feature between the Grabar գր post-Grabar regions և, which is expressed in their composition, with the particle k, without it.
 As for the bent horses of the 11th և 14th points in the example given, if we had not taken care of them, then here we have timetables composed of prepositions.
  If in Old Armenian -al expressed an action that began in the past և and ended, it also a state arising from it, then in the Middle Armenian period the particles -el, -er expressed a literal temporal meaning.
  The newly formed prepositional derby complemented the new tense tenses of the prepositional tenses, forming prepositional present tense tenses.
Let us present a statistical picture of bowed horses.
  This statistic includes only the forms of positive conjugation. In the Grabarian stratospheric stratum in Hakob Karnetsi's "Topography of the Upper Armenians" we have singled out a group of stanzas, which includes the structures with a deficient verb.
 These structures are often used by the author.
 There is a lack, but there is a present, there is, there is, the past imperfect, there was, there was, the first day, it will visit, the times will visit, but only in the third person.
  The use of the present first person, or, will, is rare.
  A. Abrahamyan marks the non-particle for the composition of the negative of this deficient verb, and the composition of the negative with no expresses another meaning: it does not stay, it does not stand 1.
  Meanwhile, H. Avetisyan և R. Ghazaryan points out that this verb should not be confused with a regular verb, the negative one is made up of no, and there is a negative verb negative is made up of a non-fraction2.
 In both, this deficient verb is found not alone, but with derbies, forming adjacent structures.
 Let us bring relevant examples.1. … .Եւ յետ Բ. The year was then sent to Khor-Virap, as written in its full history (11), 2. Ts. Անք has two monasteries, և other churches in the yard, which are now in ruins in the hands of Tachkats (17), 3. … .Եւ is in the cedar forest to be called a pine tree, և to be called Azatmayr, that there is no one who has seen the beginning, has not reached the end…. (19), 4. … .The flock of sheep is scattered from heaven to the face of the field. (22), 5. Որ .that is written in their names on the door of the king, that they should eat the bread of olofain LR. spirit…. (26, 29, 45) 6. And every house is built by an Armenian և Tachik մի there is no difference և. (31), 7. "Many stone-built churches with beautiful buildings, which are now in the hands of the Tachkats, who built the barn." (32), 8. Women կոչ Call the door to Georgia, that there are amazing crosses stamped on the wall, wonderful seers…. (37), 9. "There are up to forty thousand people living in Ispahik." (37), 1 Abrahamyan A., Grabar manual, Yerevan, 1976, p. 209.
2 Avetisyan H., Ghazaryan R., Grabar manual, Yerevan, 2007, p. 160.
10. There are countless merchants from all over the Armenian nation to buy all the contents of the settlement. (34), 11. And this fortress is built on a high place, as if it were a royal throne, at the foot of a high mountain…. (37-38), 12. There are three wild oxen scattered in the valley of the headlands. (40), 13. … .Եւ arrives in front of the monastery of St. John, where there is a mutilated corpse of St. John Garabed…. (51), 14. And you left early because people were covered in blood "the clothes were all worn out". (55).
The frequent use of structures with deficient verbs can be considered one of the features of the author's language, which could dictate the period.
  These horses make up 3% of the file system.
  As we can see, it is mainly used to accompany the last derby.
Both are Grabar realities of origin, but the frequent use of similar structures by the author in both can be considered a reality specific to the linguistic environment of the world period.
Let us turn to the negative bow.
 In Grabar, the negative conjugations were composed of a non-negative or a particle, and the prohibition imperative was a word-particle.
  This word-particle can be put in a negative sense on the past tense, sometimes indefinite tense1.
  H. We also have some interesting examples in Karnetsi's "Topography of the Upper Armenians" in the Grabarian style of denial.
  First of all, it should be noted that non-negative usage is more frequent than the use of a non-particle և a word-particle.
The following image will help to get a better idea of ​​the negative connotation of the work.
Let's mention those realities with relevant examples. 1.… .It was not enough for ten days to find the debtor, Mr. գ Tegavarats…. (26), 2. They live on the banks of the river, they have not seen snow at all. (49), 3. Then we did not take care of the dress so much, but you would wear it…. (56), 4. "Tell the truth." You are famous people, the name of the king is on you. I will not make fun of you…. (57), 5.… .if the prince was a Christian, he would not have done such a thing…. (59).
The mentioned horses are realities outside the Old Armenian, which were formed during the further development of the Armenian language.
  Since both are marked by denial, that is why we have grouped them in this section of worldly realities.
  Let us present a statistically approximate picture of the negative bow. Grabarian linguistic stratospheric linguistic stratum 1 Avetisyan H., Ghazaryan R., Page 45.
Thus, the examination of the system of conjugation of Hakob Karnetsi's work reveals that in addition to the general Old Armenian realities, the author used many post-Old Armenian, world-Armenian characters, often in a mixed way.
  A number of authors of the Early World sub-period describe their contemporaneous state with the presence of ancient literary Armenian or Old Armenian, "political" or civil Armenian։ dialects.
  This is an essential feature of the geographer,, this feature of the language characterizes Hakob Karnetsi's "Topography of the Upper Armenian".
After such an examination, we can state that in the system of linguistic conjugation of Hakob Karnetsi's work, in addition to the Grabar realities that are abundant, new world-Armenian verbal forms have been used.
Their total ratio is 86.
14.
  We think we can try to examine the extent to which this linguistic indicator works for other works of the prehistoric world.
Tamara PoghosyanGRABARYAN AND WORLDWIDE LANGUAGE LAYERS BY HAKOB KARNETSY "LOCATION OF THE UPPER ARMENIAN" TWO HUMILITY SYSTEM Humiliation:
