SUBJECTIVE ANALYSIS OF PRONOUNS AND SAYS EXPRESSING THE UNDERSTANDING OF LOVE IN SPANISH: ARMENIAN COMPARISONS
  Through the teachings of proverbs, information related to the linguistic thinking, culture, life and other spheres of the given people is passed down from generation to generation.
 Proverbs and sayings in Spanish literature are described as "small testaments", which contain all the wisdom of the people and the centuries-old life experience 1.
 Proverbs and sayings in linguistic literature are often viewed as "situational clichés" that mold various facts and phenomena of reality.
According to the approach accepted in Armenology, in particular, according to the well-known proverb A. According to Ghanalanyan, proverbs and sayings are mostly mystical works, they have no plot, they are expressed in an extremely narrow way2.
 A. Ghanalanyan also emphasizes that the popular sayings and sayings are similar in content, shape and volume, but they are different in nature.
  A proverb is an allegorical work, the original meaning of which is expressed indirectly, and the proverb expresses reality in a direct form3.
Semantic analysis of proverbs and sayings expressing the concept of love in Spanish և Armenian allows to distinguish the following semantic-thematic groups: 1. First love, 2. Love is blind, 3. Deceived, betrayed love, 4. Sincere (unselfish) love, 5. Love is the most powerful , 6. Love darkens the brain, 7. Unrequited love, 8. Love does not recognize national discrimination, 9. Forbidden love, 10. Cowardly love.
In Spanish proverbs և, love is mainly described as a selfless devotion to a loved one. "Amor nunca dice basta", "Aquelque ama, él mismo se ata y mata", "Mucho ama quien pierde la vida por su dama", and in the Armenian proverb love is compared to the eternal fire, which shows the power of eternity of love - "Love It is an unquenchable fire. ”
 Each thematic group is characterized by ընդ universal, և´ national peculiarities.1 The problem of examining the essential distinctive features of the delimitation of the concepts of "proverb" in Spanish sources is presented by the well-known proverb Kh. In the works of Sevilla Munoz.
2 Ghanalanyan A., Aratsani, Yerevan, 1960, page XIV.
3 Ibid., P.
1. First love.
 In both Armenian and Spanish proverbs, first love is described as a pure, unforgettable and unique feeling: "No hay tal amor como el primero", "Amor primero no tiene compañero", "Lunaes el primero", "Las sopas y los amores , los primeros son los mejores ”,“ Առջի սեր, առաջիբարի ”1,
2. Love is blind.
 The proverbs and sayings that include the thematic-semantic group "Love is blind" have almost the same meaning in both languages: the one you love is the most beautiful and good for you.
 Examples can be the following proverbs and sayings: "Quien feo ama, hermoso ledeseo", "What the heart wants will be beautiful", "Whoever loves, he is good", "The beloved of the heart, the bald-headed (bald) elli".
 In the Spanish proverb, the meaning of "Love is blind" is used more vividly to represent the "frog" as an ugly and unpleasant animal - "Quien sapo ama, bien le parece", and in Armenian proverbs and sayings the image of the same ugliness is conveyed by the word "atar". "Love has touched the manure," Love has touched the manure, it has not been torn, "" Love has touched the manure, the manure has touched the wall. "
3. Deceived, betrayed love.
  The proverb is anonymous, has no author, the people create it, distribute it, change it, even forget it2, which proves that the proverb helps to form a better idea of ​​the thinking of the given people.
The peculiarities of the national thinking of each nation have been clearly manifested in the thematic field "Deceived, betrayed love".
Spanish proverbs and sayings prove that the new love can heal the wounds left by the previous love: “Un dolor alivia otro dolor y un amor while in Armenian proverbs այդպես it is not so. "The heart that is there is a bottle that has been broken, it will not heal (heal),"
4. Sincere (unselfish) love.
  "Sincere (unselfish) love" is presented in the Spanish-Armenian proverb as a lasting feeling, which nothing can replace.
  In the Spanish proverb, sincere love is really priceless: "Amor es el verdadero precio del amor", "Amor de boquilla, no vale unahormilla", "Un amor verdadero no impone condiciones".
  In Armenian proverbs ամուսն proverbs, marriage without love is criticized.
 The reason for the latter is that in Armenian culture love without marriage is not accepted, but the proverb proves that sincere love is more acceptable by God than marriage without love: "It is better to love with a heart than to be crowned with a crown", "Beloved of the heart" "The crown of the church", "Beloved of the heart, crown of the master", "Beloved of the heart, blessed by God".
5. Love is omnipotent.
 The most powerful force of love is depicted in the Spanish and Armenian proverbs.
 In the Spanish proverb, love is omnipotent. Able to forgive, to understand, to fight, to overcome difficulties: “A1 Armenian examples are given according to A. Ghanalanyan's "Aratsani", where proverbs and sayings are mainly presented in their dialect versions.
always like that ”.
  In Armenian proverbs and sayings, love can work wonders: "Even if you go on a stone with your heart, it will turn green."
6. Love darkens the brain.
  The Spanish-Armenian proverb depicts in a very vivid way what happens when love rules a person. “El amor, de sabios hace asnos.
 y de asnos hace sabios ”,“ El amor esun gran desasnador ”,“ Dabagh (leather) will hit the ground with his favorite skin ”.
It should be noted that not all semantic groups expressing the concept of love are present in both Spanish and Armenian proverbs, which is a manifestation of the asymmetry of proverbial and transliterated funds in different languages.
7. Unrequited love.
  Examining the thematic semantic group "Unrequited Love" in both Spanish and Armenian proverbs, it should be noted that in Armenian proverbs the above-mentioned thematic-semantic group is very rare: "Love will be with love, nothing will pull", while in Spanish it is quite large. takes place: "Amarciado", "Amar y no ser amado es tiempo mal empleado".
  "Unrequited love" is described in Spanish proverbs as a timeless loss, because if love is unrequited, then fighting is meaningless.
In the Armenian proverb, this thematic group has almost the same meaning, but the fact is emphasized that in case of unrequited love, nothing can be achieved by force.
8. Love does not recognize national discrimination.
  The thematic field "Love does not recognize national discrimination" exists only in the Armenian proverb, where nationality does not matter at all: "Love chirishka (look) Armenian and Tajik, chikar (relative) chishka lake and girl, smart chirishka big and small."
9. Forbidden love.
  According to our study, the topic "Forbidden Love" exists only in the Spanish proverb, where it is recommended not to be unfaithful to a beloved wife or husband in the future, because whoever has betrayed once, will betray next time: "El que ama a unaesto veneno" .
 Spanish proverbs and sayings advise a loved one, which is yours, not to look at other people's property.
10. Cowardly love.
  The Spanish proverb is dominated by proverbs and sayings which state that there can be no "cowardly love". The lover should not be cowardly, but brave, because otherwise he will not be with a loved one or will lose him: "El amor no sabe tener miedo", "Amor que nomujeres", "Amor cobárdic օ, no conquista mujer bonita", " If you are a cobard, you are an amoeba, nopodrá and adelante ”.
  In the Spanish proverb, it is recommended not to trust the feelings of a person who is not brave in love: "Amante que no es osado, mejores darle de lado", "El amor que no se atreve, recompensa no merece".
Making a semantic analysis of proverbs and sayings expressing the concept of love in Spanish and Armenian, as well as separating semantic-thematic groups, it should be noted that a number of semantic-thematic groups exist in both languages ​​and have almost the same meaning.
However, there are also discrepancies that reflect the peculiarities and differences of the two cultures.
Literature 7. Baghdasaryan H., The manifestations of the universal և national in the proverbs of different peoples վածք proverbs / Language և literature in the modern paradigm of scientific knowledge, Yerevan, 2012, pp. 192-199.
8. Ghanalanyan A., Aratsani, Yerevan, 1960.
Arևik Minasyan FINANCIAL ANALYSIS OF THE FIRST EXPRESSIONS THAT EXPRESS THE CONCEPT OF LOVE IN SPANISH BY ARMENIAN COMPLIANCE Keywords: love, proverb, saying, semantic analysis, group.
