THE PROBLEMS OF GUARANTEE OF STATE SOVEREIGNTY In the last decade, the category of "state sovereignty" has been at the center of world scientific research.
 This question is relevant both in the field of law (especially from the point of view of international law) and in the field of political science and the theory of international relations.
 State sovereignty is one of the most important issues, which occupies a special place in the internal and external relations of the state, as well as in the policy adopted by the state.
  Many provisions on this issue have not yet been fully explored.
 This is due, first of all, to the fact that the content of this phenomenon is developing dynamically over time, undergoing various changes, acquiring a new meaning.
  That is why a number of issues related to the sovereignty of the state require more in-depth study.
  This issue has been addressed by a number of authors who have tried to reveal its content, principles, essence.
 However, when we study the works of different jurists, our attention is drawn to the fact that even contradictory thoughts can be discovered.
  This is due to the following: The jurists of the past and present have tried to define the concept of paradigm, but they bear the stamp of the given political-legal atmosphere of the given period.
 The political situation changes over time, the statehood undergoes transformations, adapting to the reality of the given period.
  Today the states try to be guided by common common principles.
  Theorists have rightly recorded the process of merging the legal system.
State sovereignty has a political and legal context.
These two characteristics are inextricably linked.
  From here you can do the following: In the event that the political and legal interstate situation changes, it reverts to the content of sovereignty, giving it a new essence, radically different from the previous one.
 It means that one should try to give a notion of sovereignty, which will fully describe its essence as much as possible, will be free from the political stamp of the given period.
 In order to fully discover its essence, it is first necessary to understand what principles it operates on, what characteristic features it has.
  Studies show that political scientists interpret sovereignty only from the point of view of political science, and jurists from the point of view of the theory of state և law1, while state sovereignty is a combination of the two.
  Hence, the political and legal aspects must be considered in the inseparable connection of unity.
International theory is dominated by neoliberals2, who describe sovereignty as follows: 1) sovereignty is characteristic only of the state, which separates the latter from other social realities, 2) sovereignty is interrelated with the will of the people (population of the state), 3) sovereignty is real , which does not require the approval of anyone և it must be the basis of other state and legal realities3.
Examining the points of view of different authors և legal-political directions, it is necessary to generalize the definition of the concept of sovereignty, which will characterize the phenomenon without paying tribute to the political reality.
 Thus, the following can be concluded: State sovereignty has a political-legal characterization, which means that state sovereignty consists of two main political-legal components; .
 The political aspect acts as an external force, and the legal one constitutes its content1.
- Sovereignty is an inseparable attribute of the state և is one of the most important characteristics.
 Statehood can exist only in the presence of sovereignty, and in turn sovereignty operates only within the framework of statehood.
- Sovereignty must be real.
 This principle requires that this phenomenon exist in fact, and not be formally enshrined in normative legal acts.
Inexperience is characteristic of the category under discussion, ie the holder of sovereignty is entitled to accept any solution in accordance with the internal-external conditions and relations (economic, international, etc.).
- The continuity of sovereignty means that its operation is not limited to a specific period of time, but on the contrary, the vast majority of states reflect it in the constitution, the operation of which is directed to the future.
- Independence of the government.
  The latter is the political component of sovereignty.
  This provision puts forward two requirements: 1) the state power must be free from foreign interference, the domestic policy of an independent leader, and participate in international relations on the principles of equality and freedom 1, 2) state authority within the state 2 Sergunin A., Sovereignty.
 Evolution concept, "Politics", 2010, № 4, p. 23-28. The shop should not be limited to other equal authorities2.
- The unity of state power is considered a necessary condition for sovereignty, which implies that the three branches of government - the legislature, the executive and the judiciary - should form one unity of sovereignty3.
- The supremacy of the government.
 This term means that the supreme power in the course of its activity should not be limited to any factor, which is expressed in the supremacy of legal acts that are accepted by the sovereign power, and their operation is spread throughout the territory of the state.
  The only circumstance that should constrain state power in democracies is the fundamental freedoms and rights of the people, which must be guaranteed by the state.
  Membership in international organizations should not be a restriction of sovereignty, but a way of exercising sovereignty.
A. Bredikhin rightly calls these standards principles of sovereignty.
Thus, summarizing the above, one can give the notion of sovereignty. Sovereignty is a necessary feature of the state, which is defined in the unity and independence of state power, enabling the latter to form and exercise its will independently, to elect the organizational and legal form of state power, enshrining its sovereignty in normative legal acts, establishing it in the content of state bodies.
In order to be able to study in depth the essence of state sovereignty, it is first necessary to first understand what is its source and what is its bearer.
  Some groups of scientists do not separate them, they look at them as one unity, identifying the two subjects.
  A large number of legal economists consider them as separate categories, which complement each other.
  The term "source of sovereignty" should be understood as a publicly organized entity, by the will of which the state և state bodies were formed1.
 A. In his work, Bredikhin expresses the opinion, according to which the source of sovereignty should be outside the state structure.
 However, there are different theories of the emergence of statehood, so if we are guided by this view, we will find it difficult to point out the subject that is its source (for example, according to the treaty theory of the emergence of statehood, its source will be the people, but the theory of violence - the strong class).
  Even in modern states, that subject is different.
 In our opinion, in order not to cause difficulties and contradictions, it would be right to base the domestic legislation when pointing to the source.
 The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia describes the Republic of Armenia as a democratic state and states that power belongs to the people.
  Article 2 of the Constitution stipulates that elections and referendums are one of the ways of exercising democracy.
  From the above 1 See Bredihin A.
It can be rightly asserted that the source of its state sovereignty is the people of the Republic of Armenia, the population.
 The Russian Federation has stated in part 1 of Article 3 of its Constitution: "The bearer of sovereignty միակ the only source of power in the Russian Federation is its multinational people" 1.
 The Constitution of the Russian Federation was guided by the two ideologies of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, directly fixing the idea of ​​democracy.
The category "sovereign bearer" is directly related to the source of sovereignty.
 The subject of sovereignty is the entity that exercises the highest state power in the given state territory.
  The holder of sovereignty should be considered a publicly formed group, which has the opportunity and authority to exercise supreme power in the territory of the given state through the legal system and state bodies.
Research և international experience shows that international relations are deepening and developing.
  The Republic of Armenia, which is a member of a number of international organizations, has ratified both bilateral and multilateral agreements.
International norms are especially used by the Republic of Armenia, as evidenced by Article 6 of the Constitution, according to which international treaties are an integral part of the legal system of the Republic of Armenia.
  The same is enshrined in Article 21 of the RA Law on Legal Acts, the 2nd part of which demands that the RA laws and other legal acts comply with the general norms and principles of international law, as well as the 2nd part of the 4th point of the same article is imperative. establishes a rule according to which, if an international treaty ratified by the National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia establishes norms other than those provided by law, the norms of a ratified international treaty shall apply.
Experience shows that international treaties are gradually penetrating the domestic legal system more and more, and the states, in their turn, are obliged to bring their domestic legal acts in line with the "rules" of the latter.
  However, there is a danger here, because in the presence of such tendencies, the state sovereignty will bear serious restrictions.
  The Republic of Armenia, ratifying international agreements, not only assumes certain obligations, but also has an obligation to implement the national legal acts in accordance with the norms established by them.
 However, the question arises to what extent these international legal acts correspond to the domestic law.
  As we know, every state has certain legal traditions, on the basis of which the legal system develops.
 International legal acts, defining certain rules and principles, objectively do not have the opportunity to take into account the legal peculiarities of each state.
  Besides, the interstate legal acts bring obligations for the Republic of Armenia, for the fulfillment of which the latter is responsible.
 Membership in this or that international organization contains a hidden danger, which is directly considered the author of the Doctrine of Democracy, Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
 See Russo G.-J., General Agreement, Moscow, 1998, p. 220-221.
threatens or indirectly threatens the sovereignty of the state.
  For example, Article 4 1 1 of the UN Charter provides: "All other peace-loving States may be members of the United Nations which shall undertake to fulfill all the obligations under this Charter."
 Within the limits provided by the UN Charter, armed forces may be used against states that allow human rights violations.
 It is not difficult to deduce from the above that the given norm may have different interpretations, as it is not specified what kind of violations we are talking about.
 We all know that there is no state in the world that, in one way or another, indirectly or directly, does not allow human rights violations.
  It means that this provision can be interpreted based on political and economic interests.
 Besides, as it has been mentioned many times, international acts penetrate more and more into domestic legal relations, endangering the domestic legislation, nullifying their significance.
 The RA Law on Legal Acts obliges the laws to comply with international norms, which means that the legislator should not be guided by domestic needs and requirements, but by international rules, proposed by economically and politically powerful states that do not take into account domestic traditions.
 The "Concept of Constitutional Reforms of the Republic of Armenia" can be referred to as a justification for what has been said.
 Its introduction states that one of the aims of the reforms implemented in 2005 was to implement the legal commitments made in connection with the accession to the Council of Europe (p. 2).
  Point 1 of the Introduction points out that when implementing reforms, it is necessary to take into account the fundamental values ​​that underlie the domestic and interstate legal relations of European countries (p. 3).
 Paragraph 6 of the section, entitled "Basic principles underlying constitutional reform" of the concept, is based on the implementation of the principles of the European Charter of Local Self-Government (p. 7).
  And its "2.6. The following idea is expressed in the section entitled "Judicial power". «2.6.4. Constitutional reforms must create preconditions for the 1998 resolution of the Republic of Armenia. For the ratification of the Agreement on the Charter of the International Criminal Court, signed in Rome on July 17, 2004, having in mind that the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia The obligations assumed by the mentioned agreement by the decision of ISDO-502 of August 13, 2010 were recognized as contradictory to the RA Constitution ”(pp. 36-37) 2.
  However, joining the Rome Statute of the International Court of Justice means the authority of the prosecutor of that court to initiate a criminal case against any official without the consent of the Republic of Armenia.
 There is no guarantee that other member states of the Charter, based on their own interests, will not initiate such a case.
  Azerbaijan has also started the process of joining this charter.
 It is not difficult to imagine what the consequences will be for the sovereignty of the Republic of Armenia.
2 Concept of Constitutional Reforms (draft) of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2014 March.
There is a remarkable and controversial provision in the section "2.7. Constitutional guarantees of the referendum" of the above-mentioned concept. "The main conceptual approaches to the institutionalization of the referendum are: to give preference to the option of determining the scope of referendums, according to which the issues of joining international organizations are put to a referendum, which leads to partial restrictions on the country's sovereignty ..."
  However, in this case the expression "restriction of sovereignty" in general and the term "partial restriction of sovereignty" in particular need clarification.
 Sovereignty is an objective, absolute phenomenon that cannot "tolerate" even partial restrictions.
These facts give us reason to suppose that international obligations penetrate the content of the Constitution, while the development of domestic legislation should be based on state traditions, customs and traditions in the legal system.
 In case of making such reforms, the international legal norm should not be taken as a basis, but local needs and problems, taking into account only the international experience, otherwise the state sovereignty is endangered.
 The same situation exists in case of joining the Customs Union.
No matter how much a new arena opens for the socio-economic development of the Republic of Armenia, it does not depend on other states.
  Membership in the Customs Union envisages the implementation of various programs, which will give an opportunity to strengthen the position of the Republic of Armenia in the region.
  They will definitely develop the Armenian economy, will even turn it into an energy center of the region, will give an opportunity to export electricity.
 However, putting the issue of nature pollution aside, the question arises whether Armenia has sufficient economic resources to implement these projects.
 Of course no.
 This means that the latter will be implemented with the funding of other states, which will make Armenia dependent, being an occasion to limit its sovereignty.
  According to Article 41 of the Customs Union Charter, a unified customs regime will apply to third countries.
 In other words, the Republic of Armenia is deprived of freely deciding its foreign policy strategy.
  Besides, there is one circumstance. The states are free to join this or that international organization, moreover, the same state is free to join two "more organizations, but in case of joining the Customs Union, Armenia faces a dilemma between the European Union and the Customs Union."
By joining one of these two structures, the ties with the other become incompatible.
 According to the preliminary agreement on joining the Customs Union, states can join another economic organization, if it does not contradict the charter of the Customs Union.
  From here 1 1) In the field of transport - a) construction of a new highway, by means of which the north will be connected with the south, b) construction of Iran-Armenia, Armenia-Georgia-Russia railways.
2) In the field of energy - a) Construction of a new power unit of Metsamor NPP with a capacity of 1000 MW, b) Construction of the fifth unit of Hrazdan NPP with a capacity of 440 MW, Production of power turbines (“Армения и Таможенный союз.
  Evaluation of the economic effect of integrations ”, St. Petersburg, 2013).
It is a fact that the directions of determining the free will of Armenia are limited to the Foreign Policy.
Thus, no matter how "tempting" norms of international legal acts, principles, and regularities provide, no matter how much membership in international structures provides new opportunities for the socio-economic development of the state, they are all dependent on sharp state sovereignty.
 Before joining this or that international organization and ratifying international legal acts, it is necessary to give a legal assessment of the extent to which it will affect the state sovereignty.
 It is clear that membership means giving up a certain amount of sovereignty, but that amount should not distort sovereignty.
Sargis Isoyan CURRENT ISSUES OF GUARANTEE OF STATE SOVEREIGNTY Keywords: sovereignty, notion of sovereignty, principles, source of sovereignty, bearer of sovereignty, international legal acts, restriction of sovereignty.
