PROBLEMS OF CIVIL PROCEDURE SETTLEMENT OF THE INSTITUTE OF EXPEDITED JUDICIAL INSTITUTION IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA
  The positions on the legal nature of this institution are generally different.
Some authors call it a remote-exclusive trial1.
 O. Diordia notes that it is applicable only to cases of a nature which do not require a broad evidence base;
  T. Sakhnova և T. Shishmaryova describes it as a special court procedure aimed at protecting the indisputable substantive legal interests of the subject of the material legal relationship3.
 Some of the authors describe it as a "solution" to the investigation of a case, which is carried out in the absence of the defendant during the issuance of a court order.
 In our estimation, the difficulty of perceiving the legal nature of this institution is largely due to its differences: court order, documentary proceedings, etc.
 We think that, regardless of its name, the existence of a common goal is obvious for all the above names. establish judicial structures that will facilitate the speedy administration of justice in certain categories of cases.
 Each of the authors approaches the institution of expedited trial from its own "point of view", և there is no common position on the question of what it is.
  The peculiarity of such cases is conditioned by the fact that they require an urgent solution, և the obligated party does not deny the existence of a corresponding right with the competent party և the legality of its satisfaction.
  As stated in the professional literature, the grounds for applying expedited trial established by law - the essence of this institution is that each of them can also be the subject of a general lawsuit, but not all civil claims that can be considered through expedited trial4.
 Here, in fact, the nature of the case և the absence of a dispute is valued, that is, the accelerated trial 1 See Korshunov N., Mareev J., Civil Process, textbook, Moscow, 2009, p. 466.
2 See Diordieva O., Preliminary Court Session in the Civil Process, “Peace Court”, 2005, № 6, p. 13.
3 See Sakhnova T., Shishmareva T., On the fateful procedures in the civilist process, or in the process of that process and executive productions ”, p. science statue, Krasnodar - SPb., 2005, page 53.
4 See Petrosyan R., Civil Procedure of Armenia, 3rd edition, Yerevan, 2007, p. 494.
The application is considered permissible only in accordance with the certain nature of the case, provided that the conditions for the expediency of the expedited trial are observed within its framework.
In essence, the purpose of introducing an expedited trial was to lighten the judicial procedure in this category of cases in urgent or indisputable cases, to ensure the resolution of the case within a reasonable time, to increase the effectiveness of the protection of the violated or endangered rights1.
  From the above, it can be concluded that the primary features of the institute of expedited trial are: 1. Urgency of the examination of the claim, 2. Absence of a dispute related to the law.
Moreover, until 25.05.2011. Legislative change in the CCP This position was also enshrined in law.
  Thus, Article 127 of the CCP provided that if during the expedited trial the court came to the conclusion that the case was not urgently necessary for an expedited trial, or it turned out that a dispute had arisen over the law, the court would decide to overturn the decision. makes.
 In case of making such a decision, the court conducts the trial of the case in a general manner.
 As a result, in the current legislative regulation, when the mentioned legal regulation no longer applies, it is difficult to state unequivocally that in all cases the urgency of the court to consider an expedited trial is the urgency of the examination of the claim և the absence of a dispute over the right.
We think that when talking about the urgency of the examination of the claim, the issue of preservation of an effective measure of protection of rights should be taken as a basis in case when the immediate non-solution of the claim will make the need for active actions for protection of rights meaningless and meaningless.
  We must unconditionally agree with the legal position expressed in the explanations of the Chair of Civil Procedure of Yerevan State University regarding the institute under discussion, according to which the need for immediate investigation of the case can be discussed in cases where a request for non-resolution can lead to irrevocable retrial. for the interests, in particular, to adversely affect the protection of the rights of the participants in the trial - the legitimate interests, to make meaningless the appeal, to make the meaning of the trial meaningless, to cause irreversible damage to the person who applied to the court or the person whose rights were protected; ,in other words, to make the judicial protection of the law ineffective 2.
 We think that this explains the fact that Part 3 of Article 140 of the Criminal Code stipulates that judicial acts of the Court of General Jurisdiction resolving the case in exceptional cases can be declared legally valid from the moment of publication, if it is 1 See YSU Clarifications of the Chair of Civil Procedure on the Institute of Expedited Trial և Reasons, page 3.
2 See ibid., P.
Failure to do so will inevitably have serious consequences for the party.
  In fact, the legislator has quite rightly ensured for the person in exceptional cases not only the speed of the examination of the case, but also the early acquisition of the features of the judicial act, the obligation, the enforceability of the result.
 Of course, it should be noted that in such cases (especially when the urgency of the case requires an immediate examination) it would be much more expedient for the legislator to take a different approach to the timing of the verdict, envisaging the publication of the verdict within 3 days after the hearing. duty.
 It is not so right to set a 15-day period for the publication of the judgment in case it is urgent for the party to enter into force as soon as possible.
As for the absence of a dispute over the right, it should be understood in two senses: substantive-judicial.
 In the substantive sense, indisputability exists when the validity of a person's claim from the point of view of the substantive legislation is not disputed by the other party, for example, the person has submitted a corresponding receipt confirming that fact within the framework of the confiscation of the loan amount.
  In the absence of a dispute over the legal sense, the norms of the procedural legislation should be taken as a starting point.
The analysis of the CPC shows that the norms related to the expedited trial are, to put it mildly, unsystematic.
  R. Petrosyan notes that the RA legislator, without delving into the issue that the word in the "Guarantees" of the Council of Europe is about introducing accelerated or simplified, but independent structures, և contrary to the content of foreign legislation regulating the same issue, a structure.
 This ignores the fact that in the case of expedited or shortened trial, the science of civil litigation has historically classified not only documentary or imperative litigation (court order) proceedings, but also simplified or promissory note-based proceedings, special proceedings, and non-judicial protection of rights. the mediation mission of civil cases, the notarial protection of rights, the trial in absentia, and at present, the claim proceedings1.
In our opinion, the grounds for expedited trial should not be exhaustively stated in the Code.
  This is one of the institutions, the application of which should be based on the general conditions of legality, by the observance of which the court will decide to apply it, there would be no need to directly emphasize in other articles of the Code that this or that category of cases is examined by expedited trial.
 We think that judicial discretion should be left here by observing the conditions of legality.
  This will ensure a systematic legislative approach to the institution under discussion.
Attempts have been made in the legal literature to identify certain features of accelerated trial.1 See Petrosyan R., p. 483.
1. Conducting a trial without a court session or with a maximum of one court session, 2. Conducting a trial on a purely written basis, 3. Absence of some means of proof, statements or oral explanations, etc. 1.
Մ. Cheremin distinguishes the following features.1. Absence of the trial stage or its significant reduction 2. A real possibility of resolving the dispute only with the written evidence in the case2.
I. Chernykh mentions as such a feature the exclusion of procedural actions (filing a counterclaim, involving a third party in the case, postponing the examination of the case, etc.) 3.
 Although these features to some extent reflect the nature of the expedited trial, they cannot be disclosed in all cases of simultaneous expedited trial.
  It is wrong to state unequivocally that there is no need for a preliminary court session in such cases.
 Suppose the person, presenting the demand for payment, substantiates that in reality the counterparty has not fulfilled the obligation towards him.
 Even in the presence of such documents, it is theoretically not ruled out that the other party will prove the fact that he has fulfilled the obligation.
 That is why the UK has taken the approach that an expedited trial can take place without a hearing if the presiding judge finds that the facts to be proved in the case can be concluded on the basis of examination and evaluation of the evidence in the case. has no chance 4.
  In this respect, Germany has valuable scientific traditions in civil litigation.
 The claim, the proof այլ other institutes of procedural law were developed right here, which determines the viability of the study of the German school of procedural law5.
  Thus, the fact that the expedited trial is mostly a documentary proceeding is also enshrined in the German Civil Procedure Code6.
  Pursuant to Article 592 1 1 of the Civil Procedure Code of the Federal Republic of Germany, claims subject to the return of a certain monetary claim, a certain amount of property securities, may be examined in an expedited manner if all the facts substantiating the claim can be proved by relevant documents.
  Part 1 of Article 595 of the same Code stipulates that it is not allowed to file a counterclaim within the framework of the mentioned proceedings.
  A separate securities proceeding is envisaged, within the framework of which the disputes related to the securities claims are examined in a simplified, differentiated manner.
1 See Sivak N., Simplified Production in Arbitration Process, Moscow, 2011, p. 12.
2 See Cheremin M., Story production in the Russian civil process, dis. канд. .р. science, Ivanovo - Moscow, 1999, page 32.
3 See Chernykh I., Enhanced production in the civil process, dis. канд. .р. Science, Moscow, 1998, pp. 16-17.
4 See Sime S., Practical approach to civil procedure, Oxford, 2003, p. 250.
5 See Davtyan A., Civil Procedure Law Germany, Moscow, 2000, p. 4.
6 See Code of Civil Procedure of the Federal Republic of Germany, available at www.albookerk.ru.
As for the restriction of certain evidentiary actions, it mainly refers to the conduct of an expert examination, the interrogation of expert witnesses, the lack of the need to give court orders in the case.
Thus, an expedited trial can be defined as a settlement of a case in a certain category of cases, subject to the conditions of legality set forth in Article 125 1 1 of the CCP, with the aim of ensuring an effective remedy through the application of a simplified judicial protection system.
Tigran Khachikyan PROBLEMS OF CIVIL PROCEDURAL SETTLEMENT OF THE INSTITUTE OF JUDICIARY INSTITUTE IN RA Keywords: expedited trial, judicial system, effective application.
