BIBLE CHARACTERISTICS IN REVELATION RELIGIONS Religions considered to be revelatory have the same lineage of origin (Middle East);
The temporal changes of different characters are largely due to the emergence of new world religions, as well as the imaginative (imaginative) pressures that have taken place during the historical development of individual peoples.
  One of the most important problems facing the world is to separate the artificial from the essential as much as possible.
The Abrahamic religions are descended from the ancient religions of the Middle East, based on the law of Moses.
  As religions of revelation, Judaism, Christianity and Islam are distinguished.
 These religions had different stages of development, և being monotheistic religions, they have many similarities.
  Chronologically, the first monotheistic religion is Judaism ("Jewish religion", after Judas, the son of the biblical patriarch Isaac, Israel).
 The whole history of Judaism, in particular the relationship between the Jews and God, the covenant they made, is summarized in the books of the Pentateuch, which speak of the great prophets Abraham, Moses, and others.
The next monotheistic religion is Christianity, which is one of the three world religions after Islam և Buddhism.
 The last of the religions of revelation is Islam.
The word "Islam" has several meanings, literally translating "peace".
 In other words, the word means to surrender to Allah.
 From the Islamic point of view, the followers of the ancient prophets deviated from the right path given to them by God, and the texts of the ancient books are gradually distorted.
  Each time, God sent his prophets, including Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, to refresh the true faith.
  The last prophet was Muhammad, who brought Islam to mankind in a simple, inviolable form.
The relationship between Islamists, Jews and Christians is formed not only by the expression of the beliefs of these three religions, but also by historical circumstances.
 As a result, history becomes the basis for religious understanding.
 Ethnic identities are sometimes confused with religious identities, for example, Islamists often identify and identify with Arabs, ignoring Jewish-Christian Arabs who, whether Christian or Jewish, nevertheless speak Arabic or have an Arab culture.
 In some cases, Arab-Israeli relations are viewed as an Islamic-Jewish conflict.
  These cases are often equated with the Crusades, during which Christian Arabs were often accused of converting to Islam.
  For the analysis of the relations between Islamists, Jews and Christians, their ideological manifestation is possible within a certain temporal and geographical limits.
 For us, the question is what attitude the apocalyptic religions have towards each other from the very beginning.
  In general, Judaism treats Christianity as its "derivative", but believes that Christianity is a "delusion", which, however, does not prevent its main elements from reaching the Jewish people.
  If we look at it from the point of view of Judaism, we will see that Jesus of Nazareth has no religious significance. Its prophetic significance or calling it "Christ" is not accepted in Judaism.
 For many years the Jewish people sought to assimilate the Romans in small steps, all of which was presented to the Romans around the idea of ​​uniting the faith, restoring them on an equal footing, and emphasizing that the Jewish "elect" would not lose its power in any case.
  In the course of such events, Christians appeared, who in a short time were able to attract the attention of the Romans, which the Jews had been waiting for and striving for for many years.
In Christian theology, Judaism, based on the Talmud, is considered a religion.
  Although Christianity and Judaism have obvious similarities, the New Testament contains a number of passages that have traditionally been interpreted as anti-Semitic.
 The study of the canonical Gospels remains one of the foremost biblical controversies in accusing the Jews of Pilate's acquittal.
Showing the relationship between the revelatory religions and their historical development, let us consider their characters.
Adam is the first of the 25 prophets mentioned in the Qur'an.
 The Muslims regarded him as a man chosen by Allah to guide people to the right path.
  Adam, like all other prophets, had five attributes that were obligatory for Islamic prophets.
Information about the prophet Moses, except for some passages from the Bible, is found in the Torah and the Qur'an.
  Toran considers Moses to be the greatest prophet and covers the whole story of his life and activity (Deuteronomy 34).
10).
  In the Qur'an, Moses portrays Muhammad as a long-awaited prophet.
  The Prophet Moses was given books and papers, which, according to some Islamic sources, were made of green emerald, and the inscription on it was made of gold.
  The 10 revelations of the prophet Moses are placed on 100 pages.
  According to Islamic custom, Moses is called Kalimallah (the bearer of Allah or the person with whom Allah spoke without a mediator).
The Prophet Abraham is prominent in Islam, Christianity, and Judaism.
  For the Jews, Abraham is the embodiment of power, who fulfilled all the commandments, first accepting the one God.
In Christianity, Abraham is the father of all believers (Rom. 4).
1).
  Although the Qur'an և Sunnah does not contain information about the life of Abraham, it does contain facts that specifically explain the most characteristic features of this image.
 Ibrahim is one of the 5 greatest Islamic prophets.
 Abraham was neither a Christian, nor a Jew, nor a Gentile, but a caliph (Luke 3: 60).
67).
The Qur'an considers Ishmael to be a separate prophet.
  Ishmael's historical role in Muslim practice is far superior to that of the biblical Ishmael.
  The names "Ishmaelites" and "sons of Ishmael" are found only in the Bible, and the Northern Arabic scriptures mention only six of the 12 tribes of the Bible, who were called Arabs1.
Mary, the mother of Jesus Christ, is considered one of the most preferred women in Islam.
 The 19th surah of the Qur'an is named after him, which describes the wonderful birth of Isa.
 She is the only woman mentioned by name in the Qur'an.
To Christians, Christ is the Son of God.
 And who is he for Muslims?
  Muslims do not call him "self-proclaimed" or "God", considering him one of the most famous prophets of God.
 In the Qur'an we constantly find the complete rejection of the fact that Jesus is considered "divine" or "Son of God" 2.
 The fact that he was born without a father still means that he is "the Son of God", in connection with which Adam is mentioned, who was born "without a father" without a mother.
  During his lifetime, many Jews refused to accept him, while the Qur'an states that he will come again, at which time all Jews and Christians will believe in him.
  The Qur'an speaks of Jesus Christ (Isa ibn Maryam) as the forerunner of Muhammad, like him, one of the most powerful ancestors.
  In the Qur'an we find the word "al massi" (messiah), which appears as an addition to the word Isa.
 Islam recognizes that Jesus performed miracles, spoke to people from the cradle, and raised the dead.
  The Qur'an also unequivocally acknowledges that Jesus is considered to be the forerunner of Muhammad.
  According to another view, the Qur'an rejects the accepted view of Christ's death and resurrection.
  He was never called the Son of God, since the concept of son is accepted in the true physical sense, which is why he was never worshiped as a god.
 The image of the Christian holy trinity, as well as the role of Jesus in all this, has never been accepted within Islam.
 Muhammad showed everywhere that he had never understood the Christian teaching.
  He seems to have been more inspired by Jesus' ideas, which gave more space to the divine triad.
 Moreover, Muhammad believed that the Christian triad was composed of God (his father's name was always missing), Jesus արի Mary.
One of the most important questions of the day was why the Jews did not accept Christ.
 The point is that the idea of ​​Zionism was widespread in Judaism.
 Zionism is the right of every Jew to return to the Jewish state promised by the Almighty Creator.
  The Jewish people did not accept Jesus Christ for the following reasons: • According to the Old Testament, the Jews are the people chosen by God, that is, the Jews are the "chosen people" as established in the Old Testament.
• According to the New Testament, God speaks through His Son, Jesus Christ, that all people or nations who accept baptism և His commandments become "chosen" by God, that is, they lose their exclusive right to be "chosen by God."
  In addition to all this, the Jews had to accept baptism and partially change their traditions.
 Indeed, because of the loss of the title of "chosen of God", the Jews did not accept Jesus Christ as the Son of God, the New Testament as the law of God.
 The Jews preferred the Torah, which they thought would give them the right to remain "God's chosen ones."
  Not only did they not accept Jesus Christ, but they promoted his crucifixion, cooperated with the Romans in their pursuit of Christ, which was their main mistake.
 The Jews make two claims about the messiahship of Christ. o No one can be considered God. The Torah affirms that there is only one Almighty, invisible God, the only God who is not divided into a trinity.
  Jesus himself recognized the uniqueness of God.
  And Jesus Himself said to him, "Why do you call me good? There is no good except one, God" (Matt. 19).
17).
  In this case, how can a mortal who is born, crucified, died, be an immortal, indivisible part of God?
o Jesus does not do the work of the Messiah.
 If Jesus were the Messiah, he would have fulfilled all the Messianic prophecies given at Tanach.
  For example, the Messiah would bring world peace and tranquility, universal reverence for God, leading all people in His way.
  He will cure all the patients. "Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be plucked up;
5-6).
Summarizing the above, we should mention that in the center of our study appeared both male and female representatives, who were the most important bearers of the historical and cultural layer of the Semitic peoples and were the engine of development.
 Let us state that the canonization of the Septuagint from the texts of the Old Testament (5th century) is, in fact, the island that provides an opportunity for serious scientific research.
In fact, far ahead of world religions, these texts are considered by modern scholars to be the original texts.
  The arrival of the white teacher, as the undoubted, unchanging authority of the prophets and apostles of ancient times and the evaluation of their activities, really speaks of the fact that the ancient texts later became different from the regulars, and had deep socio-economic reasons. which have led to controversy in the sources.
  Despite the above controversy, the protagonist of the Old Testament is Moses, and the axis around which the value system of the Old Testament unfolds is the Ten Commandments given to Moses.
One of the key issues in the field of study is the influence of Jesus of Nazareth as the greatest biblical figure on the systems of the other two revelatory religions.
  Let us state that the Old Testament, being written before Christianity, can not have an attitude towards Jesus, and Christianity the coming of Jesus Christ as savior 2 See www.evangelie.ru.
It is based on the prophecies of Hintakaran.
  The attitude of Judaism towards Jesus is expressed in multicolored colors in the Talmud, the text is nothing but an attempt to intimidate the radiant values ​​of Christianity.
The discrediting texts here are indisputably the result of the tense relations of Christianity-Judaism that lasted for 1700 years.
 But the image in Islam. Here Jesus is the closest prophet to Allah և the glorious military commander who defeated the evil force in the last battle.
Concluding the article, it should be noted that it is not possible in the course of the article to comparatively study the comparison of the types of apostate religions, but a general study shows their genealogical roots, the evolution of society from the Old Testament to the Qur'an and the Qur'an.
Amalya Grigoryan BIBLE IMAGES IN REVELATION RELIGIONS Keywords: Judaism, Christianity, Islam, monotheistic religion, Prophet, Talmud, Qur'an.
