LEGAL SETTLEMENT OF THE ACCUMULATED PENSION SYSTEM IN THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA The Republic of Armenia is declared a social state by the Constitution.
 Ratifying the 1966 The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of December 16, 2006 - Armenia has made an international commitment to ensure the social security of individuals.
  Based on the above-mentioned legal norms, it has become the duty of the state to allocate certain means for those who are unable to take care of their own needs on their own.
  Thus, Article 37 of the Constitution stipulates that "Everyone has the right to old age, disability, loss of a breadwinner, unemployment, social security in other cases provided by law."
 One of the most common forms of implementation of social security by the state is the payment of pensions.
Until 2014 As of January 1, 2012, there was a one-tier pension system in the Republic of Armenia, which presupposed only the distribution of the distributional pension component, according to which the current pensions were paid from the total revenues of the state budget.
 In this case, the social security contributions made by hired workers, employers, and individual entrepreneurs were directed to the state budget and then used to pay the pensions of retirees1.
  However, the RA government in 2005 He noted that the maintenance of the current pension system could lead to a systemic crisis and hinder the socio-economic development of the country.
  Taking into account the international practice, radical reforms were made, as a result of which the transition from the distributive pension system was made to a multi-level one, in which case, in addition to the distributive pension, a new accumulative pension component was added.
 2011 The RA National Assembly adopted the RA Law on Funded Pensions2.
  The main purpose of the law was to create an opportunity for persons who have made a funded pension payment during their employment in the Republic of Armenia to receive pension income in addition to the state pension at retirement age, providing a direct link between pension payments and the amount of pension received, as well as enabling the pensioner to influence pension contributions. having the opportunity to personally select the person managing the accumulated funds և their management policy3.
  The accumulative pension system can be represented by 2 eggs: dance 1 See http.
//www.arlis.am/documentview.aspx?docID=64540, 2010.
2 See ibid.
3 See ibid.
tadir և voluntarily.
  According to the law, during the mandatory funded pension in 1974 A person born after January 1, 2012, saves a certain amount of money during his / her working activity, which is accumulated in his / her individual pension account.
  The state can make a certain addition to the account.
  As a result, the specialized investment organization, which has the accumulated income of the person, invests them in various financial transactions.
 The income received is included in the pension accounts.
  Reaching retirement age, a person receives as a pension the amount of income he / she has saved, increased by the state և as a result of governance.
  As for the voluntary funded component, in contrast to the mandatory one, in which they can become participants only in 1974. Those born after January 1, in this case, anyone wishing to join such a system can be involved without age restrictions.
 The RA Constitutional Court has a certain settlement on this issue in 2014. by Decision No. 1142 of April 2, 1, which will be referred to in this paper.
  Voluntary allocations are not made by the state.
Ensuring socially stable old age is extremely important for every person.
  It seems that the RA law "On Funded Pensions" is a very expedient tool for the settlement of this issue, but it gained the public's distrust and caused a big wave of protests.
It should be noted that the policy adopted by the Republic of Armenia operates in the mandatory funded system only in 5 countries of the world: Chile, Kazakhstan, El Salvador, Mexico and Nigeria.
  It is only in these countries that the employee's pension payments are accumulated in private funds.
 Chile is considered the investor of this system.
20th century By the end of the year, Chile's state pension system was in crisis as pensions were paid more and received much less.
  Reforms were made in the form of accumulative payments, which was even more successful when the system was privatized2.
  Great interest in the pension system arose when the UN calculated that in 2000-2050. The number of people over the age of 60 will triple.
 It has been said many times that this model is the best, but the time has come when the accumulative payments had to be reimbursed in Chile, instead of 70-80% of the promised average salary, the participants now receive 39% 4, which caused some to give up the accumulative pension system. conditions.
  The need for this system is obvious, but the question arises whether the problem lies in the system or its inappropriate regulation and application.
 One of the reasons is that this system is very risky, people are not ready to transfer their income to any private organization.
 Among the risks of the accumulative pension system are: 1 See www.concourt.am/armenian/decisions/common/2014/pdf/sdv-1142.pdf, 2014.
2 See http.
//www.noravank.am/arm/articles/detail.php?ELEMENT_ID=5015, 2009.
3 See Brooks S., Social Protection and Economic Integration.
  The Politics of Pension Reform in an Era of CapitalMobility, 2002, p. 491.
4 See http.
//zham.am/am/news/16933.html, 2013.
• Financial market risk.
  The market can not avoid crises, և if the employee reaches retirement age after the crisis, the latter's pension will be very low.
• Labor market risk.
  If the employee does not have a job for a long time, he will save less money and will receive an already low pension at retirement age.
• Managing mandatory funded funds is much more costly than public ones, so private fund managers will charge high fees for their services.
• The risk is 5% given by the state, which may lead to an increase in the state budget deficit.
The RA Constitutional Court in 2014 As a result of the research carried out for the purpose of making the decision No. 1142 of April 2, 2012, it was concluded that the countries where they were able to correctly combine the state distribution, mandatory funded-voluntary funded pension systems, registered positive results in the social security issue1.
  In the framework of this scientific work, by studying the experience of these countries to some extent, we will try to find a more expedient model, as it is possible to update the social security pension system և to meet chronological requirements, but more important is the correct choice of model and clear definition of control.
According to Article 1 of the RA Law on Funded Pensions, it is called to define the structure of mandatory "voluntary funded pension components, the process of funded component management", the powers of state bodies involved in its management, the functions of pension fund managers, pension fund custodians, account operators. , who are entitled to participate in the pension component on a mandatory and voluntary basis,, a number of issues related to the funded pension system.
 According to Article 6 of the above-mentioned law, 1974 Employees and public servants born after January 1, 2006 (except for military servicemen, persons equal to them, such as police officers, conscripts, participants in military operations of the Republic of Armenia, employees of penitentiary institutions, Judicial Acts Compulsory Enforcement Service) compulsory executors), notaries և individual entrepreneurs compulsorily participate in the mandatory funded component.
  It should be noted that hired workers are considered to be public, civil and community servants, deputies of the RA National Assembly, members of the RA Government.
  The participants are obliged to make accumulative payments from the contract income.
  This refers to foreigners as well, stateless persons, who receive basic income in accordance with the RA legislation.
  The mandatory funded pension system is also open to salaried employees born before January 1, 1974 and those in public service 1 See www.concourt.am/armenian/decisions/common/2014/pdf/sdv-1142.pdf, 2014 year
persons (except military servicemen և persons equal to them), notaries և sole proprietors.
  The participation of the latter is done on a voluntary basis.
 However, it should be noted that the decision to voluntarily join the mandatory funded component must be final, as by joining the system, the person will no longer have the opportunity to return to the previous system, regardless of whether they will change or be fired.
The Constitutional Court recognized this norm as constitutional 1, and the drafters chose it in 1974, taking into account the factual possibility of the state returning the money to the participants.
Accumulative payments for participating employees are made in the amount of 10% of the basic income, which is formed as follows: If the participant receives a basic income of up to 500,000 drams per month, he / she makes a 5% accumulative payment from the basic income every month, and the remaining 5% is paid by the state from the state budget.
 If the basic monthly income of the participant exceeds AMD 500,000, the accumulative payment is made as follows: 25,000 drams is paid from the state budget, and the remaining payment for 10% is made by the participant.
 As for the sole proprietor, in case of receiving a basic income of up to 6,000,000 AMD per year, 10% is made up of 5% each received from the state budget by the state.
  If the annual income exceeds 6,000,000 drams, the state pays only 300,000, and the rest is paid by the participant to fill the 10%.
In case of working with several employers jointly or receiving income from several sources under civil contracts, each employer or income payer is obliged to calculate the mandatory accumulative contribution from the paid income separately և transfer it.
However, the monthly payment from the state budget for one participant may not exceed 25,000 drams per month, and for individual entrepreneurs, 300,000 drams per year2.
The participants accumulate their money in pension funds, which are created for collective investment activities, the essence of which is to attract the funds of many investors, to invest them jointly in different assets, and thus to make a profit for the investors according to their share.
 According to Article 4 of the RA Law on Investment Fund, the mandatory pension fund can act only as an open contractual fund3.
  The latter is managed by the manager on the basis of fund management contracts.
 The assets of the contractual fund, the securities or the property acquired with those assets and the rights to it are registered separately և are registered in the name of the manager of that fund, without the ownership of the latter over them.
  The right of ownership continues to be maintained by the person who made the investment 4.
  Contract fund manager with fund management transactions 1 See www.concourt.am/armenian/decisions/common/2014/pdf/sdv-1142.pdf, 2014.
2 See http.
//www.arlis.am/documentview.aspx?docID=64546, 2010.
3 See http.
//www.arlis.am/documentview.aspx?docID=64518, 2010.
4 See ibid.
The procedure and conditions for fulfilling the undertaken obligations are regulated by the provisions of the RA Civil Code envisaged for the fund manager1.
  Currently, Amundi-ACBA Asset Management CJSC and J-Quadrat Amega Asset Management LLC are registered as pension managers in Armenia. The first of the founders is Amudi Company, which manages more than 750 billion assets. It has a huge experience2, and the second is a joint venture of the Austrian "J-Quadrat" investment company and the German "Talanx Asset Management" company3.
 The fact that both are well-experienced organizations can play an important role in building trust among participants.
The powers of the pension fund manager in the pension sphere are defined by the RA Law on Funded Pensions.
According to the above law, the manager is obliged to fulfill his / her obligations in a conscientious and reasonable manner, at a proper professional level, for the benefit of the participant.
  In case of non-fulfillment of the obligations specified by law, the Central Bank of the Republic of Armenia may apply any of the sanctions provided by law.
 Article 79 of the RA Law on Funded Pensions lists the following sanctions: warning, fine, deprivation of the qualification certificate, revocation of the permit.
  However, in our opinion, the existence of sanctions is very important both in the effective management of the managers and in the reimbursement of the participants' trust, therefore only the application of the above-mentioned sanctions is ineffective, more serious violations by the manager are necessary In this case, apply administrative or criminal sanctions.
The participant cannot directly decide the policy of investing his funds.
  However, since each pension fund will be governed by a pre-published investment policy approved by the fund manager, each participant can choose the preferred investment policy through this or that manager, this or that pension fund.
  Permissible investments of pension funds ումների Investment restrictions will be defined by the decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia.
The shares of the pension funds registered in the participants' pension account are considered to be the property of the participant.
  The right of the participant to manage the mandatory pension fund shares is limited until the participant: • reaches the retirement age, • has a third degree limitation of the ability to work in the manner prescribed by law, • travels abroad for permanent residence հրաժար renounces RA citizenship.
1 See http.
//www.arlis.am/documentview.aspx?docid=29, 1998.
2 See http.
//www.amundi-acba.am.
3 See https.
//www.c-quadrat-ampega.am/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=55&Itemid=73.
Permissible, inadmissible investments clearly defined by the RA Law on Funded Pensions, which are made by the manager, but Article 44 has authorized the Government to impose quantitative-currency restrictions.
 The RA Constitutional Court in 2014 By the decision of April 2, 2006 he referred to this issue, coming to the conclusion that, based on Article 83.5 of the RA Constitution, according to which the procedure and conditions for exercising and protecting the rights of individuals and legal entities are defined exclusively by RA laws, this is considered a law implementing norm. Therefore, it must be defined by law, not by the decision of the Government.
 The court also took into account the international experience, in particular of Bulgaria, Romania, Poland, where the scope of defining the assets of the pension fund, as a guarantee, is defined by law.
  The Government referred to this issue in 2012. by the decision of December 27 1.
 In our opinion, the problem here is not what the government should define, but the fact that according to the RA Law on Legal Acts, the law has a superior force over the by-laws, the Government's decision2.
  In addition, the fixing of the norm mentioned in the law will provide stability, will strengthen the participants' trust in the system.
As it was mentioned, the law became the subject of numerous discussions, to which, finally, the RA Constitutional Court responded.
  The issue of the constitutionality of the mandatory component of the funded pension, which was recognized by the Constitutional Court as contradictory to the RA Constitution3, is especially discussed.
  The decision was substantiated as follows: Article 8 of the Constitution stipulates that the right to property is recognized and protected in the Republic of Armenia.
 The analysis of the RA Constitution allows concluding that the realization of the property right is clearly regulated, "more attention is paid to the restriction of this right."
None of Articles 43 և 44 of the Constitution, which provide for the restriction of rights, mentions the restriction of property rights.
  In some cases, however, this right is limited, but these circumstances are enshrined only in Article 31 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, without reserving it even to the competence of the legislator.
Of course, if one of the above grounds does not exist, it cannot be limited.
  According to Article 45 of the RA Constitution, "Everyone is obliged to pay taxes, duties, make other obligatory payments in the manner prescribed by law."
  In the decision made on the issue of the RA Constitutional Court, he noted that the obligatory payments are of public-legal nature; they are entered in the state or community budget4.
  This is a restriction on property rights, but the restriction on property rights as a result of the application of a mandatory funded pension is not included in Article 31 of the Constitution, nor can it be applied as a payment under Article 45 of the Constitution, as it is paid to a private organization.
  Because of the property 1 See http.
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?docID=80783, 2012.
2 See http.
//www.parliament.am/legislation.php?sel=show&ID=1280, 2002.
3 See www.concourt.am/armenian/decisions/common/2014/pdf/sdv-1142.pdf, 2014.
4 See http.
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?docid=43955, 2008.
The right may not be restricted on grounds not provided for by the Constitution, hence the mandatory component of the funded pension is declared unconstitutional.
 As for the voluntary component, it is not unconstitutional, as here the owner uses his property at his own discretion.
  According to Article 163 of the RA Civil Code, the right of disposal is a legally secured opportunity to determine the fate of property1.
 The employee, at his / her own discretion, which is his / her property, gives a certain share to the pension fund, հասնել after reaching the appropriate age, receives both his / her investment and the income received as a result of the manager's management.
Recognizing the obligatory component as unconstitutional, it turns out that such a regulation of the system contradicts the RA legal system.
  However, from the very beginning of this work, a number of issues were raised, the settlement of which has become a priority for any state.
 That is why in the current situation it is necessary to develop a system that will still fill the unresolved issues with the state pension system.
In our opinion, the regulation of these payments should have been as follows: first, we propose to define it as a mandatory accumulative payment of social security, giving the latter general features to the payments of Article 45 of the Constitution.
 In other words, the latter will be transferred not to private funds, but to the state budget, a target fund will be formed, which will be managed by the government, making payments in clearly defined areas, from where it will be possible to get a stable income.
  In turn, the Government will enter into a contractual relationship with specialized managers, who will make effective investments, but the money will be received by the fund participants not from the investment managers, but from the state.
  As a result, after reaching the defined age, the person will receive the sum of money accumulated by the Government as a result of its management.
This system is similar to the Employers Provident Fund in Malaysia, where a joint fund is formed, which is managed by the state itself2.
  Singapore, where the Central Provident Fund operates, has a similar regulation. In this case, the fees of each of the participants are divided into 3 parts: they are directed to the solution of such problems as investing in financial instruments, the solution of the participant's health problems, as well as the settlement of problems related to education, place of residence3.
  Studying the settlement of these countries, comparing it with the legal system, we find that it is more expedient to introduce the advantages - the accumulations, not to the private, but to the state sphere.
According to the RA Law on Funded Pensions, in case of both mandatory and voluntary pensions, a person cannot receive the amount in his / her account until reaching retirement age.
  We propose to provide an exception to the legislation.
  Each participant in the fund in the state budget will have his own account, where the amount accumulated by the latter will be defined 1 See http.
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?DocID=80061, 1998.
2 See http.
//my.jobsdb.com/MY/EN/V6HTML/JobSeeker/handbook/regulation-of-employment/EPF.htm, 2012.
3 See http.
//finsecurity.by/?p=1094, 2012.
the size of the mari.
 A minimum amount will be set, which should not be below the account, but in certain situations, for example, in case of a serious illness, the person will be able to receive money from the account without violating the minimum amount in the account.
Singapore has introduced a feature in its funded pension system: the more a person grows, the less deductions from his salary decrease. If at the age of 20 the deduction is made by 20%, then at the age of 50 it reaches 5% 1.
 In our opinion, this is a very effective regulation, as with age the participant's ability to work decreases.
 It can be defined as follows: Arbitrary x% of income will be paid before the age of 25, which will be lower than for people over the age of 25, as participants at this age are just entering the labor market and are engaged in low-paid work due to lack of experience.
 The payment will increase at the age of 25-45, and already after that x% payment will be made again.
The problem is that the amount charged to the fund is paid from the nominal income.
  It should be noted that in 2013 Profit tax was levied on the income of the employees.
  The latter is levied instead of the previously levied income tax and social security payment.
  As a result, in the case of the mandatory funded pension system introduced in the Republic of Armenia, an income tax is deducted, and then a cumulative payment from the nominal income.
 Mandatory funded pensions are collected from the basic income of a hired worker, notary և sole proprietor.
 The basic income, according to the RA Law on Funded Pensions, is the salary and other equivalent payments, the income received from civil activities for the performance of work, which, according to the RA Law on Income Tax, is subject to taxation 2.
It turns out that a person, receiving income, first pays a certain income tax, which is collected from the state budget.
  Since, according to the RA Constitution, tax collection is the basis for restricting a person's property rights, we propose to make the accumulative pension deduction from the already taxed income, as the taxable part of the income is no longer the property of the latter, therefore it can not be used with pension contributions. from.
Finally, the advantage of this regulation will be that the Government of the Republic of Armenia will have clearly defined powers in this area, in contrast to the Law of the Republic of Armenia "On Funded Pensions", where the powers of the latter are very uncertain.
  Besides, according to Article 89 of the RA Constitution, the RA Government manages only the state property3, and in case of the accumulative system it accumulates in private funds, which leads to the lack of state control.
  From Batsidran, public trust will be ensured, as in the case of private funds it is significantly reduced.
1 See http.
//mycpf.cpf.gov.sg/Members/Gen-Info/mbr-Gen-info.htm.
2 See http.
//www.arlis.am/documentview.aspx?docID=64546, 2010.
3 See http.
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?docID=1, 1995.
Based on the above-mentioned circumstances, we come to the conclusion that the necessity of this legal act is very important now, but the model chosen by the legislature does not correspond to the RA legal system, besides, the solutions of a number of primary problems are incomplete.
We offered certain conditions for the development of a new model, which are based on both the domestic system and the experience of a number of foreign countries, but the effectiveness of these conditions will become clear only as a result of the introduction of the field of law enforcement.
Anahit Santrosyan LEGAL SETTLEMENT OF THE ACCUMULATED PENSION SYSTEM IN RA Keywords: pension system, funded pension system, mandatory-voluntary funded components, pension fund, funded payment.
