HYDROGEOLOGICAL PROBLEMS OF GEGHAMA MOUNTAIN GEOGRAPHICAL METHODS:
  In the past, geophysical methods have been used extensively in solving regional-geological structural problems in the given area, especially in the adjacent areas [1].
After a rather thorough work, the area is made of area gravimetric (1).
200000, 1.
100000 և 1.
50,000 scale) էր aeromagnetic (1.
100 000, 1.
50,000, 1.
25,000 scale) corresponding extraction maps.
  In particular 1.
Out of 50,000 gravimetric maps, the recalculations performed by L. Tadjosyan in the areas adjacent to Lake Sanaa show a rather complex picture of gravity anomalies (Buge reduction).
 A regional field map was constructed by the method of averaging (Tikhonov-Boulanger), on which the general tendency of isoform distribution was maintained.
 In particular, the Gridzor anomaly is fully preserved on the map recalculated from ∆g to zzgzz, which confirms that it is probably due to the peculiarities of the local geological structure.
In order to solve the geological problems, using electro-exploration methods, the total capacity of the lavas in the Gridzor area, its adjacent areas, and the structure of the expansive relief are determined.
 These materials are generalized in the work.
 It is known that the mineral thermal waters of Gridzor site are discharged in the bed of Gridzor river, on the 2700-3000 m mark of the eastern slopes of Geghamaler mountain range.
  The mentioned springs come out in the section of fractured andesite-basalts և due to tectonic disturbance, which is expressed on the surface of the earth և is predicted by general geological notions.
  The expansion structure of the area adjacent to the Gridzor site, the distribution of groundwater, can be seen in Figure 1 below.
The Geghama mountain range, within which the Gridzor site is located, is about 70% covered with fissured lavas, which are represented by andesite, andesite-basalt, andesite-dacite-volcanic-like species.
  The total power of the lavas, according to the electro-intelligence data, reaches up to 700-800 m.
 In the formation and distribution of groundwater (which can become a source of natural water supply) belongs mainly to the mentioned volcanic rocks, the expansive aquifers enclosing them.
 According to the relief structure of the expansive water-repellent layer, the eastern slopes of the central part of the mountain range, adjacent to the Gridzor site, the concentrated groundwater flows (ancient) are mainly south-west-northeast.
  It approximately occupies the territory of Chkalovka և Yeranos villages.
 Concentrated watercourses և Separately buried aquifers are bounded by local watersheds.
  Thus, for example, the water flow of Hayrivank is unloaded north-west of Gavar city, which is limited by the 1750 m elevation.
  Tsaghkashen-Hnagavar watercourses are unloaded west of Batikyan village, where the basin of the water-repellent layer is 1700 m, and Sarukhan watercourse in the territory of Sarukhan groundwater mine (the basin of the relief is 1750 m).
  Finally, the watercourse of Hnagegharkunik is unloaded in the underground basin north of Yeranos village, the demarcation point of which is 1850 m.
Figure 1. Relief map of the regional water-repellent layer of Geghama volcanic mountain range, M1.
50 000 According to the spatial position of the buried watersheds, the relief structure of the regional water layer, the concentrated deep streams within the Geghama mountain range are formed mainly at 2400-2500 m, which coincides with the spatial position of the plateau near the mountain range.
  The extremely cracked lavas, porous slags, large fields of "chingils" և significant amount of atmospheric precipitation (up to 800-900 mm / year) contribute to the penetration of surface water into the depths, as a result of which underwater runoff is formed.
The generalization and analysis of the published archival materials of the geological-geochemical-geophysical studies have led to the following conclusions.1. In volcanic rocks, the primary tectonic fault zones serve as channels for the infiltration of atmospheric water, sources for the formation of geothermal sites.
2. The presence of deep aquifers, the thickness of water-repellent rocks, and the structure of the relief of the latter serve as a criterion.
• According to the aeromagnetic data, especially in the Geghama-Syunik area, intense magnetic anomalies are observed, which are probably due to the magnetic bodies of deep origin.
  Based on terrestrial magnetic exploration, tectonic faults have been mapped (possibly also with high fissures) that may play a role in the formation of the geothermal field.
• The analysis of gravimetric criteria shows that the studied site is characterized by different fields.
• Geoelectric standards are especially important for solving the problem.
Based on the interpretation of the performed probing materials, data were obtained on the thickness of rocks (layers), their installation depths, the presence of aquifers, fissure zones, which are necessary for the compilation of physico-geological models of the studied areas, serve as a basis for solving geological problems.
LiteratureRaffi Karamyan, Esther Manukyan SOLUTION OF HYDRO-GEOGRAPHICAL PROBLEMS OF GEGHAMA MOUNTAIN BY GEOGRAPHICAL METHODS Keywords: physical-geological models, borehole drilling, drilling rig
