CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY OF LEGAL ENTITIES Nowadays the issue of criminal liability of legal entities is not solved.
  It is considered one of the most controversial issues in legal practice and in the theory of criminal law.
 The legislation of the Republic of Armenia remains in the position of a traditional classical school, according to which only persons who have reached the age of physical, sane, criminal responsibility defined by law are subject to criminal liability.
  The mentioned problem cannot be considered finally solved both in practical and theoretical terms.
Despite all this, the institute of criminal responsibility of legal entities has received the approval of the international community.
  In particular, in 1978. The European Commission on Crime in the European Union encouraged European countries to recognize legal entities as subject to criminal liability for environmental crimes.
At present, this institution is enshrined in the legislation of a number of countries (in the Anglo-Saxon-continental legal system).
These include Australia, Belgium, England, Denmark, Israel, Iceland, Ireland, the Netherlands, Canada, USA, Finland, France, etc.
According to the Criminal Code of the Netherlands, criminal activity (inaction) can be committed by both a physical and a legal entity1.
 The Dutch Criminal Code stipulates that a publicly dangerous act must be in the interests of a legal entity.
  If the offense is committed by a legal entity, then not only the legal entity but also the person who ordered such activity to be prosecuted may have been prosecuted and caused the offense.
  In some cases, even the person who managed the activity on the basis of an order issued by the director of the company may be prosecuted.
Under Dutch criminal law, a legal entity can be prosecuted for any crime, but in practice this is excluded for some crimes (such as sexual offenses).
 As a rule, the most common type of punishment for them is a fine.
The French Penal Code regulates in detail both the procedure for prosecuting legal entities and the types of punishment imposed on them.
  According to the Criminal Code 1 See "Netherlands Code of Conduct", available at http: // www.
//law.edu.ru/.
According to Article 121-2, legal entities are subject to criminal liability for the criminal activity committed by their body or representative in favor of him (legal entity) 1.
The state is not considered a subject of criminal law; it cannot be held accountable.
 The point is that if he is fined, it will not be expedient to collect it from the state budget and send it there again.
 The second reason is that the state will lose its certain position and authority, which will definitely have a negative impact on the state power.
Local self-government bodies and their associations, having the status of a legal entity, are liable only for non-fulfillment or improper fulfillment of their delegated powers.
  The Code provides for liability for individuals who have acted as perpetrators or accomplices of a crime committed by a legal entity.
 The spheres against which the encroachment leads to criminal liability (crimes against the life of the person - inviolability, production, transportation, experimentation on people, terrorism, etc.) have been fixed.
 The Code enumerates the scope of actions for the performance of which the legal entity is subject to responsibility.
  A fine may be imposed on a legal entity, such as a ban on operating in the sector (for a maximum of 5 years), a temporary decision (for a maximum of 5 years) or a final dissolution decision, deprivation of the opportunity to conclude a transaction with state organizations, etc.
It is necessary to present the application and peculiarities of the institute of criminal responsibility of legal entities in the Anglo-Saxon legal systems.
  Among such countries is England, where the institute of criminal liability of legal entities was rooted in the 19th century. in the middle.
England lacks the institution of guilt of legal persons 2, which exists in the countries of the continental system (if the crime was committed by its body or representative և another person for the benefit of a legal entity).
  Here the issue is settled only by the objective impartiality of the crime, when the fact is proved that the law has been violated, which is the basis of responsibility.
  Such a solution gave rise to a number of controversies, in order to regulate it, the principle of "identification" was introduced, according to which the activity (inaction) performed by the head (s) of the legal entity, as well as the mental state of the person at the time of the act are identified with the mental state of the legal person, for example, if the manager participates in the commission of a crime as an organizer, then the legal entity is held liable as an organizer of the crime.
  In addition, it is possible that a natural person may be a lawyer 1 See Code of Conduct France, available at http: // www.
//law.edu.ru/.
2 See Minin R., The Conceptual Responsibility of Eridicians in England, "Business in Law", 2006, № 3-4, p. 9192.
There is a liability with the person as an accomplice or accomplice.
  English law does not provide for the types of punishment and liability that apply to legal entities.
  It follows that the same punishments are applied to them as to individuals.
Thus, the peculiarity of the English model is that there is no institution of guilt here, the objective is based on the principle of "identification", չէ the scope of the crimes for which legal persons can be prosecuted is not exhaustive.
The experience of foreign countries shows that not only is it possible, but it is necessary to create a system of criminal liability of legal entities in order to develop the economy and prevent crimes more effectively.
  We think that it will definitely be effective for the RA legal system.
It is more expedient for our country to apply the French model, which exhaustively envisages the scope of criminal acts for which legal entities are held accountable.
Today, publicly dangerous acts committed by legal entities have increased.
  These include terrorism, activities that pollute the environment, a number of tax crimes, drug trafficking, money laundering, and more.
 We believe that the institution of criminal liability of legal entities is able to solve such problems,, in this article we will try to substantiate the need to accept it.
First of all, let us mention that one of the difficult issues in the field of criminal responsibility of legal entities is the issue of him as a subject of criminal law.
A group of authors believes that the subject of criminal liability can be only a natural person, if the criminal liability of legal entities is envisaged, it will contradict the principle of liability for guilt (guilt is the psychological attitude of a person towards his act).
 As a result, it is necessary to make changes in the Criminal Code, to create a dual system of criminal legislation for the liability of individuals, to criminalize legal entities.
 E. Antonova gives the definition of "corporate crime" in her work. "A crime committed by a legal entity must be recognized as a publicly dangerous activity committed in its favor, on its behalf or by the persons who manage the legal entity, exercise its rights and responsibilities."
Some of the authors think that the act of a legal entity can also be endowed with such features of a corpus delicti as causal connection and guilt.
 In this regard, A. Nikiforov notes. "A crime is considered to have been committed by a legal entity if it was committed (directly or through other persons (persons)) by the person in charge of the legal entity. 1 See Antonova E., Юридическое лицо как субъект преступления.
  Opyt for foreign countries and prospects of application in Russia, Vladivostok, 1998, p. 18.
by the horse (persons) who exercise his rights և duties, act within their framework ”1.
 In the case of the above definition, the guilt of a legal entity is manifested in a mediated way by the criminal activities of its employees or the body, which exercise its rights and responsibilities.
This view is even more justified և at the same time it is realistic, taking into account the fact that the legal entity is ultimately created by individuals to meet their needs.
Some authors (for example, A. Naumov) believe that legal entities should be recognized as a subject of criminal law when they commit crimes against the economy, the environment, peace and humanity.
Given the constant increase in the number of crimes committed by legal entities or for their benefit, it must be agreed that the system does not work effectively.
 It is true that the issue is controversial և not perfect, but we must keep in mind that innovations are not alien to law.
  Some criminologists believe that legal entities can be held liable under administrative or civil norms.
  A. agrees with this point of view. Jalinski, noting that "civil-administrative norms are able to fully implement effective measures against crimes committed by legal entities."
  In our opinion, this view is not so convincing, as it is unacceptable to protect public relations that are the subject of criminal law by administrative or civil law norms, and in some cases the sanctions enshrined in civil-administrative legislation are ineffective.
  The point is that the amount of damage caused by the act committed by a legal entity is several times more than the amount of the fine imposed on it.
 As for the fact that the institution of criminal liability of the legal entity contradicts the principle of criminal liability, it should be understood that it not only excludes the mentioned principle, but also comes to supplement it.
Today, "corporate crimes" are considered "successfully committed" because one or more people are held responsible for them, and then the real criminals remain in the shadows.
  For example, the criminal founders deliberately declare the company bankrupt in order to avoid fulfilling its obligations; բնական the executive director is naturally responsible for not being able to prove the fact that he has fulfilled the founders' orders.
  It is necessary to take into account one important circumstance. We can prosecute a thousand executives for financing terrorism, money laundering or polluting the water, but we need to understand that this will not change the situation.
 The organization, in the interest of which the director acted, will find a new director and will continue his criminal activity.
 This is a period from which there is only one way out - legal entities 1 See Nikiforov A., Contemporary tendencies of development of conditional legislation and conditional orthodoxy, "State and Law", 1994, № 6, Page 65.
2 See Circle Chair “Introduction to the Institute of Contingent Liability of Eridicians.
 pro et contra ", available at http.
//pravo.hse.ru/announcements/35750330.html.
It is necessary to recognize the subject of a crime, which will allow the legal system to be used against the participants of the company.
  Of course, one should not think that all the members of the company should be held accountable.
  If their participation in the crime is not proven during the investigation of the case, no charges can be brought against them.
  This is possible because those who used to stay in the shadows will now be prosecuted, and the organization will not continue its criminal activities at the expense of its executives.
However, the recognition of legal entities as a subject of criminal law implies radical changes in the criminal legislation.
 The criminal liability of legal entities should either be regulated by a separate law or separate general chapters of the criminal code should be provided, which, in our opinion, would be more appropriate to avoid certain contradictions.
 Thus, it can be assured that the criminal liability of legal entities is an effective way to fight crime, an effective way to prevent and compensate for the enormous damage done to society.
CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY OF LEGAL ENTITIES Garik Abelyan Keywords: Institute of Criminal Liability of Legal Entities, Subject of Criminal Liability of Legal Entities, Criminal Liability, "Corporate Crime", Crime, Regulation of the Institute by Foreign Countries, Effectiveness of the Institute.
