SOME FEATURES OF THE VAN DIALECT ACCORDING TO THE "DEMOCRATIC SPEECH ABOUT NAREKATSI" THE DIAVENUE OF VAN was spread in the eastern and southern settlements of the Van Sea.
  The dialect was studied by Hrachya Acharyan, according to whom the borders of the dialect are from the north to Diadin, the western side of Bayazet, from the south, Moks, Ozmi, Shatakh-Aghbak, from the east to the Persian border, and from the west to the border of Moush dialect.
  According to that, the Van dialect (especially the Mokats sub-dialect) is the southern border of the Armenian language, after which mainly Kurdish-speaking and Arabic-speaking Armenians.
The Van dialect belongs to the branch.
 With its eastern border dialects, it resembles h> kh with the change of sounds, the silencing of vowels, eo, iv sounds, which are the features of the Karabakh dialect.
  However, it differs from the Eastern ones in its humility.
The main points of similarity with the Ararat dialect are the exceptional -particle composition որ, that in case of taking a person, the direct problem is formed with both plaintiff and և tragic syllables.
  With these two points, the Vanibar dialect is among the dialects called "Aryan" and "Armtyan".
  It has a lot of deviations compared to Grabar words, but it is not very changed, it is understandable for everyone.
According to Hrachya Acharyan, the Van dialect has 46 sounds. they are classified as follows1. a) 9 vowels: a, a (qm.), e, h, i, o, eo, u, ub) 3 two-dialects: e, o, o (qm.) գյ, դ, ձ, ջ (sound), պ, կ, կյ, տ, ծ, ճ (խուլ), փ, ք, քյ, թ, ց, չ (breathing), զ, ժ, յ, ր, ռ , լ, մ, ն, վ, ֆ, հ, հյ, ս, շ, խ, ղ (according to Acharyan, short bghdz.).
Many writings have been preserved in the Van dialect, for example, Sherents' "Van Saz" և Ter-Sargsyan's "Pandukht Vanetsi".
 The Van dialect presents the story "Folk Word about Narekatsi", it was provided to us by Norayr Poghosyan, Associate Professor of the Chair of History of the Armenian Language.
It is not a secret that our nation has accepted and sanctified Narekatsi with great faith.
This is obvious by the fact that before the 19th century. Folk tales about Narekatsi were constantly told.
We have examined this legend by paying attention to the phonetic, idiomatic and verbal features of the dialect.
A) Phonetic features.
  In the Van dialect, the consonant at the beginning of the word turns into kh, for example, axa> khogh, hasan> khasan, tel> kher (oh, ken), south> kharav, back> khet1.
1 See H. Acharyan, Examination of the Van Dialect, Yerevan, 1953.
2 See Luma (literary magazine), book B, Tbilissi (Georgia), 1899.
At the beginning of the word, the consonant d becomes t, and in the middle of the word it becomes normal after r, then it also becomes t, for example, dolvat> teolvat.
Naregatsi spoke to Rev. GorginHer ches's time for prayer. "I have a lot to say. , but there are other phonetic features, for example, in vowels.
In the beginning, the vowel turns into i, for example, Mshakner was surprised. Inka's hand and foot Narekatsi In the original we noticed that the vowel has become e, for example, dove> eunuch. position.
  In the first position, before the consonants g, r, y is added to y (deer> yeghnik…), and in the second position, before r, it turns into e, for example, eram> eram. And the two-dialect is changed to u, For example, guest> khur. Your vardapets came and I will serve Narekatsi.
In the dialect, the y's consonant is changed to i, for example, joy> joy, kingdom> kingdom. You will make joy with your body.
In the dialect, this diphtheria becomes a vowel, for example, ker> grb. One gallon was eaten in a rug. Every hour it did not come down. He would not see March.
1 See H. Acharyan, Examination of the Van dialect.
There is a change in the head> gleoch. There is a loss of sound, for example, sheep> sheep, white> white. The gels became a shepherd where the sheep.
 The old man fell into a trance.
B) Psychological features.
  Some of the morphological features are, for example, the compound form in the neuter, which is placed in the preceding position1, for example, the Spirit was holy in the past tense, the heart would not be touched in the plural. In the plural, the plural gender is formed by adding the participle to -ats, for example. He took the cultivators.
The suffix suffix of Grabar causal verbs in the dialect turned into transitive verbs, which are formed by two eggs, short and long.
 The short one is made up of endings and the long one is shown.
  Here, taken from the original, for example, from harats, khostovants, filled (grb. Lnul (to fill) is a verb, the basis of which is to fill or fill), they stopped, for example, it was Res Gorg who resurrected ... In the legend it is noticed that the Van dialect has preserved the present tense of the Grabar border, for example, (i) come, (i) give. Narekatsi spoke to Res GorginHer you will not come for the hour of prayer. Res came to Gorgin Khogh. Like the dialects in the Van dialect, the prepositions have disappeared, especially the preposition f, and the preposition has remained in various connections.
Here is a case with a preposition, which is attached to give the verb: itu = i (preposition) + tu (grb.tal is a verb, which is placed on the border, past participle, III c.).
Almost all the dialects belonging to the K branch have six syllables.
 The dialect of Van also has six syllables և is similar to the syllable of the Ararat dialect, it does not have only an infinitive syllable, for example, direct-claim. In the plural, the plural number is placed with the inonutative pronoun (en (a) ez.) = inonqy, y fell into the genitive. their demonstrative pronoun (its unique number) is placed in the plural, just as the personal pronoun ke (you) = your personal pronoun is placed in the gender-tragic syllable, y is omitted.
They were very surprised there. They changed the amount of water they drank. C) Verbal features.
  The Van dialect borrowed a number of words, for example, dovlat (Turkish: large family), mezar lik (Turkish: grave), tmmav 1 See H. Acharyan, History of the Armenian language, vol. 2, Yerevan, 1951.
(Turkish: finish, escape), nait (Turkish: gloomy face, sad), res (Turkish: leader), suriyat (Turkish: faith), orokhkel (Turkish: bless: in the original he also sings the egg) , պեմունաթ (Arabic: aperakht, clumsy).
  The words naavazar, geakhn, yaman, kheriat, keakav, keapanak, kearamat, faraghat are borrowed.
We must emphasize that there is no significant difference between the original we examined in the Van dialect by Hrachya Acharyan 1.
To get a more complete picture, we present an excerpt from the story at the end: They came to Mount Narek, they gave an angel to Narekatsi, they came to Keo, I will come to Narekatsi.
He took Khovuvu's purse and put it on his head. He went to the dark place where he was on the mountain. He came in front of the priest, and took the priest to his right.
Diana Hakobyan SOME FEATURES OF VAN DIALECT ACCORDING TO "FOLK SPEECH ABOUT NAREKATSI" TRADITIONAL Keywords: dialect, conjugation, conjugation, phonology, borrowing
