THE QUESTION OF THE CONDITIONAL WEATHER WITH THE ARMENIAN LANGUAGE եղանակ The verbs composed of the present and past tense forms of the verb's to go, to go, have been given different names in the grammar of Ashkharbar.
 I would have seen the ones made up of K. with a dreamy past in St. Palasanyan calls it conditional, and in the present, I will see, he puts the verbs with a grammatical composition in the border participle.
  According to Abeghyan, these verbs are called hypothetical.
 He unites, I will see, I will see you և he claims that their action is hypothetical.
  He does not rule out the introduction of the above-mentioned horses into the subspecies of ghzdzakan, as a perfect ghzdzika, "which expresses that by putting a particle on ghzdzakan, I will go, I will go" 1.
 According to A. According to Gharibyan, "it shows an action, the fulfillment of which is often conditional or hypothetical" 2.
 According to G. However, this method indicates an action, "the execution of which, by the speaker, is presumably said" 3.
Ս. Abrahamyan considers the verbs with k to be borderline verbs, because in his opinion both show the exact action to be performed.
Examining, I will go, I will go to the verbs, S. Abrahamyan thinks that in the first case the speaker's focus is not on the possibility of performing the action, but the intention, and for the decisive precise actions the hypothetical or conditional forms are mainly used4.
These two verbs, the past participle of the boundary and the conditional present, identify, the difference between which is seen only in the inevitability of the letters with k.
  Here (I will come) the meaning of presupposition is predicted. "From this point of view, it would be more correct to use the default name instead of the hypothetical one."
H. In Barseghyan 's opinion, the peculiarity of the verbs expressed in the past participle is the speaker's conviction of the action to be performed. "The day after the conditional or hypothetical mood expresses an action to be performed after the moment of the speech, the authenticity of the performance of which is confirmed by the speaker with a firm conviction, sometimes conditionally or presumably."
Գ. Jahukyan prefers the hypothetical name, using the traditional name, the verbs endowed with k (h) can be called sub 1 Abeghyan M., Theory of the Armenian Language, Yerevan, 1965, p. 327.
2 Gharibyan A., Grammar of the Armenian language, Yerevan, 1949, p. 215.
3 S. G., Modern Armenian language course, Yerevan, 1955, p. 198.
4 Abrahamyan S., Conditional or Hypothetical Method of Modern Armenian, Bulletin of Social Sciences of the USSR Academy of Sciences, 1953 9, page 245.
5 Barseghyan H., Theory of conjugation and conjugation of modern Armenian, Yerevan, 1953, p. 245.
positive.
  Since k (h) is definitely a value of a particle expressing an assumption, so I will go and write the verbs get a limit value.
On the other hand, each assumption is based on a certain condition, so when combined with the conjunctive's's verbs, the latter express a condition, and the c's equals a condition that can be fulfilled under a certain condition (eg, "I will go" or "If" Come, I would go ”), hence the conventional name of the horses with k.
According to M. Asatryan, "These verbs show an action that will definitely be performed on the basis of the speaker in the period after the moment of the speech" 1.
Consider the following examples: I will leave the city noisy again, And I will set off forever alone, Silently the evening will fade away, I will lie down in the field, under a green tree.
              (VT) The lyrical hero knows the sequence of his actions.
  It is neither an assumption, nor a condition, the one who leaves will definitely leave the city, the very first word in this evka, again, which shows that the situation is repeated.
Noisy city և Forever lonely connections indicate that there are sufficient grounds for departure.
 In the last two lines there is a desire, which is again certain.
Peaceful night you will come to me, I will kiss your tender hands, I will scatter the painful memories of life, And I will light fairy-tale lights.
P. Poghosyan, using the categorical confirmation and strengthening of this method, also mentions non-verbal, theatrical hypothetical meanings.
Assumption in Armenian is expressed through the corresponding words (երևի, maybe և etc.), which can be put on any weather.
According to P. Poghosyan's sense of possibility is expressed in the example presented by the "categorical apron": "He will come to find out how many villages are left in his head", does not express doubt, the lines do not have a ambiguous meaning, but are even convinced , proves that the ordeal will have come (the performer is used for this purpose).
  The reason for coming to know the villagers.
  An expression of conventional meaning is seen in the following example. "Whoever brings the unquenchable fire, he has chosen my son" (HT).
"Hypothetical horses often express events whose performance depends on the condition; if the condition is met, the action will be performed."
"That kind of woman, if I had my soul or an ashugh, without weapons, without a force - would go against the interests."
 In the observed verbs brought by linguists, the determination to perform the action (will become) is obvious.
 According to E. Aghayan, "it is not correct to attribute the conditional meaning of conditionality to the hypothetical method, the conditionality is a syntactic private part of that method.
2 Ibid., P.
is the meaning that is connected with the syntactic meaning ”1.
 This is the opinion of H. Barseghyan. "Even in the case when the performance of an action expressed by a conditional clause is connected with any condition, the contract idea is expressed there not by the footnote of the main sentence, but by a second sentence."
  The following example explains: "If it does not come, tomorrow will be a good day", we connect the fulfillment of reality with the condition, the idea of ​​the condition is expressed in a secondary sentence.
In our opinion, these verbs also have no conventional meaning. Let's analyze the words of the poems used in the secondary sentence.
"If you have even heard that I am not in this world, I will come the same, I will come no matter what, I will come wherever I am."
 The author announces his decision to come without taking into account the conditions.
  Aparni's horses, I will come, I will bring are used instead of the present ounces of the borderline tense, as a repetition of a custom. "He eats and drinks after every hard work.
 A good hunter will not look for it, he will keep the prey ", the present definition of" Fish will not be caught by the tail, they will be caught by the head ", when a special feature of the object" the dog will bark "must be expressed.
With these same forms, I will put, I would put, Armenian-Armenian expresses its borderline present, past imperfect.
 P. The ambiguity, sometimes the same meaning, is noticeable in the examples observed by Poghosyan.
 "It is the sky of love, It smells like a flower, It loves love like a virgin, It eats life in the dry desert", and the second, "I will not eat well, I am the soil under your feet, yar", in the example that there is a dialectal influence, but it is possible to understand not only the meaning of the present moment, but also the existence of the general present.
 In our opinion, the author's giving is not related to the moment, but the lover's "middle heart" does not respond to the good.
  The second person is considered to be a categorical braggart. "They will call me Artem Petrovich" or "Well, they will call me PanTilis."
 The examples and parallels expressing the present idea at once prove the supremacy of the definite meaning of this method.
The second person is used in the sense of imperative mood. "Tomorrow morning you will pay my debt to Barsegh without any other reason, you will take the bill, you will prepare five thousand rubles for me."
 The negative of the institution is formed by the negative derby, by the negative eggs of the auxiliary derby, which is put before the derby, I will not come, I will not read. They express this decisive, firm decision. "I will not betray my Nuard, no matter how magical you are, oh, Shamiram" (VT).
 The semantic nuances expressed by these verbs: I will come-go (present), as I will come-will, I will give (adverbial derby) - I will give (present-Armenian), the parallels show the conviction of the speaker in this way: I will not let you die, And I will call, I will overcome the evil death (Av. Is.) ".
  We express the basic meanings of this weather with the following templates: Aparni d + em oj. verb - inevitabilityImperfect present - I go (conviction) Imperative mood - determination The meaning of the affirmative is noticeable in the past tense, which "expresses the voluntary subjective attitude of the speaker towards the act performed in the past."
 Positive forms are put into action 1 Aghayan E., The Context of Modern Armenian և Context, Yerevan, 1967, p. 373.
in case it has not been done, and in case of denial, if the action has been done. "You would not be bored with science, you would not be bored with love and life, if you had great enemies" (E. Charents).
 Linguists contrast the present with the past by looking at the hypothetical.
 This is how H. explains. Barseghyan. "The one who speaks with past tenses conditionally or presumably confirms the possibility of its realization in the past tense."
Miranush Kesoyan THE ISSUE OF PRESENTED WEATHER IN ARMENIAN Keywords: k moderator, hypothetical method, conditional method.
