THE APPLIED IMPORTANCE OF MEDICAL-GEOGRAPHICAL MAPS One of the first attempts at the practical application of geographical knowledge was the constructive relationship between geography and medicine, which was started by the greatest physician of all time, Hippocrates in BC. In the 5th century.
 He saw the main causes of the disease of the population in the quality of the natural environment, in particular, air, water and place.
 This principled approach is not only maintained now, but has been enriched and given new content due to the achievements of the basic sciences.
  Now, in order to assess and satisfy the health condition of the population, all the features of the geographical environment sciences are used, not individually, but with a systemic approach, as interconnected and interconnected components of an open system called the natural environment of human existence.
Due to this, the relations and cooperation of medicine with geography as an integral science studying the natural and social-social conditions of human existence and development are becoming deeper and more diverse [1, p. 359].
 During medical-geographical researches, scientific methods are used: historical, mathematical, modeling, mapping, specific-scientific, statistical, sociological, information obtaining, field observations, questionnaires, information, empirical, theoretical generalizations, methods of classification, rounding, evaluation, technical processing of received information. and a number of other methods of means: electronic-computing equipment, perfo cards։.
  The first medical-geographical maps appeared in the 19th century, later initiating the creation of an independent branch of cartography.
  A. Avtsin, B. had large investments in this sphere. Vershinsky, B. Prokhorov, A. Keller, S. Malkhazova, V. Tikunov, A. Hayriyan և others.
 Three types of information are used to create medical-geographical maps. 1. Information on the health of the population living in the map area. It is based on statistical data received from the population's medical institutions.
  It can be for individual patients with an annual report.
2. Information on geomorphological, geochemical, geological features of the mapped area, weather, soil cover, chemical structure of water, vegetation factors. can be obtained from the relevant maps և explanatory materials.
3. Information on the economic living conditions of the population of the mapped area. refers to the peculiarities of resettlement (population density, type of settlements, population structure). can be obtained from maps of complex atlases [3, p. 345].
In order to compile medical-geographical maps, a joint work of a medical geographer-cartographer is required.
  In the initial stage of work organization, the role of the medical geographer can play a role in the development of the content of the map, the system of symbols, the relevant information, and the cartographer in the choice of the basis of the map and mapping methods.
  He is also in charge of mapping.
 The areas of application of maps are very diverse: urban development, recreational work, health care, territorial administration.
 A. is considered a special work in medical-geographical atlas cartography. Keller's Atlas of the Oceans (1974, 1977, 1996).
 Presents studies of coastal areas of the oceans, medical-geographical characteristics of coastal areas.
 Designed for scientists, doctors, sailors, tourists.
To make a complete medical-geographical analysis ագր to map A. Keller distinguishes three groups of phenomena: • Infectious diseases, • Dangerous marine animals, • Health care.
Through the analysis and generalization of literary and cartographic sources, he managed to show the spread of plague, yellow fever, Tsutsugami fever, Chagas disease and other diseases.
 The system of symbols presents the reasons for their spread: lizards, mosquitoes, flies, etc.
  A special place is given to the areas of distribution of marine animals dangerous to humans - sharks, poisonous fish, sea snakes, sea urchins, etc.
  The maps also show the places of care, the WHO (World Health Organization) information centers.
  Such maps help to reduce the risk of getting sick with similar diseases, contact with dangerous animals, and cover the entire network of medical services for tourists.
  Armenia also has some achievements in this field of cartography.
  A. Keller և O. Edited by Shepina A. Hayriyan's work "Medical-Ecological Atlas of Armenia" (1998), which presents analytical maps based on health statistics.
 These maps are used to express correlations, to present the nature of the interaction between the natural and socio-economic conditions of the area and the health of the population.
  However, medical-geographical zoning maps have not been created yet.
  They are based on territorial conditional differences between the environment and the health of the population.
  Medical-geographical differentiation is the expression of the links between various natural and socio-economic phenomena and the health of the population.
 The medical-geographical differentiation of the area, like any other geographical differentiation, can be expressed in three main ways: classification, typification, and zoning.
 These are the best options for circling.
 The process of medical geographical differentiation ends with the division of territorial systems characterized by medical-geographical features.
  And each subsystem is again a correlation of other factors and elements.
 Environmental systems such as anthropoecological and biosocial have been used scientifically.
The first ones are formed as a result of the interaction of human-geographical objects, natural-territorial, spatial-production complexes, and their mapping is based on natural, man-made-social components (Table 1). The causes of diseases are so diverse that their spatial combinations are often used for mapping.
Each of the object types presented in Table 1 has its own characteristics in terms of mapping.
 Criteria for evaluating an object are especially used, as their forms and expressions can be very different.
 The changes that occur as a result of human-environment interactions can be different for different sex groups of people of different genders, and therefore their mapping approaches are different.
  The co-operation of a geographer and a cartographer may not be sufficient for the study and mapping of anthropoecological systems; other specialists, such as psychologists and sociologists, are required.
Maps of the underlying elements of the study Antropoekologiakan systems [4, page 25] Table 1 ObyektitipeObyektshrjakamijavayrBnakanKlimayakanErkrakimiakanJrayinHoghayinBiogenAbiogenSubyektiSubyektChapanishikategorianmardkategorianObyektignahatmanchapanishnereMorfologiakanFiziologiakanBzhshkakanKensabanakanMardanhatSeratarikayin khmberRasanerMardkutyunBzhshkakensabanakanSnndi tesankyunnereVarki bzhshkakensabanakantesankyunnereTekhnatsinSotsialakanSotsialakanArtadrakanZhoghovrdagrakanTarabnaketsmanTntesakanSotsialakanKartezagrutyan biomedical industry development there are serious problems in our country.
They are mainly conditioned by the acquisition and processing of information, as well as by conducting extensive medical-geographical studies.
  According to statistical data, in Armenia in 2012 The total morbidity of the population aged 15 years and older is about 40% of the country's population.
 The highest index is in Yerevan - about 45%, and the indexes of Lori, Shirak, Syunik, Kotayk are relatively higher than the regions.
Causes of the disease The differences in the structure within the administrative units remain little covered.
  The need for medical-geographical maps is great, with their help one can get a clear picture of the medical-geographical situation of the country, having the regions of disease spread, possible causes of their occurrence (especially if they are ecological), quantitative indicators, both absolute and relative.
  Medical-geographical zoning maps can be made for the whole country, as well as for individual administrative units and cities.
 Such an attempt was made for Gyumri (map-scheme 1, author: A. Valesyan).
 It was compiled as a result of the elaboration of statistical materials for about five years, the areas served by the city's polyclinics were separated, the most common diseases in the population were identified in them.
  With the help of such maps it is possible to make a prediction and organize the medical care process even more effectively.
Map-scheme 1. Medical-geographical zoning of Gyumri [2, p. 29] The mentioned map-scheme identifies areas that are considered to be of varying degrees of health hazard.
  Different anthropoecological components have been put in the basis of their separation.
It is obvious that the medical-geographical cartography in the Republic of Armenia should be developed in order to be able to reduce the disease of the population, even to a small extent, due to the natural-ecological situation of the area.
 Literature 1. Valesyan A., The constructive significance of medical-geographical research in the solution of health problems, the scientific-structural potential of geography և practical application, Yerevan, 2011.
2. Valesyan A., Assessment of the health-geographical situation of the urban settlement (by the example of the city of Gyumri), abstract, Yerevan, 2004.
Azatuhi Valesyan PRACTICAL IMPORTANCE OF MEDICAL GEOGRAPHICAL MAPS Keywords: constructive, Hippocrates, natural systemic approach, serious problems, recreational work, urban planning, territorial organization, health care.
