THE EDUCATIONAL CHARACTERISTICS OF "DIFFICULT" CHILDREN (ADOLESCENTS) "You should not compare the child with other children, always compare him with himself" A. Petrovsky's "Difficult" children are those children who have difficulties in the process of education and upbringing.
It is necessary to clarify this term from the beginning.
  We are not talking about children with neurological disorders or mental retardation, but about physically and mentally healthy children, whose behavior reveals certain features1.
According to the definition of pedagogues-psychologists, the behavior that does not correspond to the moral norms accepted in the society և the social requirements is commonly called anti-social (antisocial).
 Anti-social behavior is conditioned by the influence of a negative micro-environment, abnormal relationships in the family, shortcomings and mistakes of family-school upbringing.
From this we can make a valid conclusion that "difficult" children are not born, but become, going through the difficulties of life due to family, school mistakes, parents, friends, various state and public institutions, the wrong approach to the formation and upbringing of the child. .
Although it is accepted that the main age of difficult children is adolescence, we consider it more correct to look for the preconditions for becoming "difficult" earlier in preschool age, because if we do not undertake rehabilitative-educational influence to overcome the child's difficulties, such children usually go to school. unprepared for training.
They do not obey the demands of school, do not do homework, have conflicts with friends and teachers, break discipline, sometimes run away from classes, even from home.
Due to unfavorable conditions, they may find themselves in illegal groups.
  The typical features of a "difficult" child are especially evident during adolescence, when the child's social position undergoes significant changes, as a result of which adolescent activity takes on a new direction and the environment shows a new attitude towards him.
 Complexity of that stage of mental development 1 Harutyunyan T., Age pedagogy, lecture package (unpublished).
The reason is its internal contradiction.
 Adolescence is still a typical childhood period of development, in which we are dealing with a person standing on the threshold of adult life, who strives for independence, self-affirmation, demands that adults recognize and accept his rights and opportunities.
 The age limits of adolescence correspond to the 5th-9th grades of the school, including 11-15-year-olds.
L. Vygotsky noted. "The complexity of a difficult adolescent's personality structure is not given from the beginning, but is conditioned by the influences of life, the nature of the relationship between him and the environment" 1.
Based on modern scientific and pedagogical studies, three essential features characterizing a difficult child are distinguished in journalism: 1. The child deviates from the norm of behavior.
  This term is known in pedagogy as "deviant behavior".
  The terms "offense" and "opposition" are also used to describe deviant behavior.
  By delinquent behavior we mean a chain of misdemeanors, petty crimes and other similar acts.
  When we say religion, we mean deviation from the norms accepted in the given society.
2. The concept of "difficult" child is attributed to children whose behavioral deviations are not easily corrected.
  The notions of difficult child երեխ pedagogically abandoned child are singled out here.
  All "difficult" children are considered to be pedagogically abandoned children.
  By pedagogically abandoned child we mean a person born as a result of personal inferiority, complexity or improperly organized pedagogical work.
3. "Difficult" are those children who feel the need for an individual approach to them by the trainees, and special attention by their peers2.
"Difficult" children include children who need behavioral correction, as well as disobedient, stubborn, capricious children who resist the demands and advice of adults.
 Most of these children can be mischievous, disorderly, aggressive and rude.
 A certain group consists of children whose behavior is characterized by a lack of desire and habit of work, ie laziness.
It is noteworthy that the fact that certain needs are not met during the local period leads to affective behaviors in some children; these children are characterized by aggression, resentment, and the ability to be easily hurt.
 These children generally have either very high self-esteem or are very skeptical about their abilities.
  Only timely pedagogical intervention can solve or at least mitigate the internal conflict ևPrevent such changes in the child.
  Working with a difficult child requires a particularly subtle individual approach, which requires: 1. show careful friendly attitude towards the child, 2. rely on its positive qualities, 3. to have a strong belief in the potential of his moral powers.
It is especially difficult to do educational work with children who have been left behind from a pedagogical point of view, among whom there may be illegitimate teenagers.
 These children may have obvious antisocial, age-appropriate, object-oriented needs.
  Their need for communication is distorted, and their expressions of friendship, friendship, debt, and honesty are distorted.
  The roots of the conflict situations that lead to the distortion of the moral qualities of adolescents should be sought first in family upbringing, which is exacerbated by the shortcomings of school upbringing.
 Usually, when talking about unfavorable family conditions, which negatively affect the child, there are many reasons, paying special attention to the incomplete family.
 While not denying the negative, criminal impact of such a family on the adolescent living in it, it should be noted that 2/3 of the adolescents who committed the offenses were brought up in full-fledged families with material and housing conditions, which shows that they are crucial. not the position and composition of the family, but the moral atmosphere prevailing there, the relationships of family members, as well as relationships with those around them.
  Unfavorable family relationships, negative parental example, indifference to others, hypocrisy, rudeness, aggression, drunkenness - such manifestations create an unfavorable microenvironment, which is one of the reasons for the formation of a "difficult" adolescent.
  The child of such a family is constantly mutilated in such a family.
  Adolescents' rudeness and hooliganism often come as a unique way to protect themselves from being bullied.
  It is a matter of serious concern to those's outwardly prosperous families where parents are indifferent to their children's inner world, which can be considered a unique form of child's self-love and violation of honor.
But the shortcomings of family upbringing create certain tendencies, the problem of which must be corrected and eliminated by a state organization such as a school.
  Unfortunately, these shortcomings of the heart are often deepened by the pedagogical obsession in a number of schools, where the pedagogy of barriers is still flourishing: it is not allowed to reduce, make noise, etc.
 Simplified understanding of the law deprives adolescents of the opportunity to orient themselves freely, to carry out unhindered and active activities.
  As for the teenagers who create difficulties in school life, the attitude of teachers towards them is usually negative, which contradicts the profession of a pedagogue.
Conflicts with teachers deepen because "difficult" teenagers do not usually make friends with their classmates.
 Whether adolescence is characterized by the tendency to communicate with friends, to gain independence and respect for adults, "difficult" adolescents already in the 3rd and 4th grades, in fact, are out of the circle of their peers.
  In an effort to gain a foothold, these children can turn to negative behaviors for help with false authority.
The social situation of the development of a "difficult" teenager is such that he is left behind by both the family and the school staff.
  But as such a teenager retains his or her ability to communicate and grow up to be an adult, he or she finds himself or herself in a "street" group of adolescents whose micro-environment has the potential to increase self-esteem and compensate for negative assessments by family and school staff.
 At the same time, in such a micro-environment, the adolescent is in a very difficult situation, as he is under the influence of the "heroes" of the yard, who, being older, by their "authority", exerting pressure with more frequent threats, unite the teenagers in a group.
Such a situation, when the adolescent is left out of the family և school staff որոն seeks protection in the internal relations of the adolescent's unique anarchic team (which are often friendly), misdirects the adolescent's needs, self-awareness, self-affirmation and communication.
Based on psycho-pedagogical research, the following conditional classification was given to "difficult" adolescents: 1. Children with communication disorders, 2. Children with very high or very low emotional reactions, 3. Children with mental development disorders, 4. Children with poor development of volitional qualities (stubborn, weak, capricious, disorganized) 1.
The first group of adolescents is characterized by socially negative qualities such as overtly anti-social views, distorted relationships and assessments.
  The ideas of friendship and courage are distorted in these group of teenagers, the feeling of shame is very wrong.
 They can be rude, malicious, aggressive, fiery, unrestrained, quarrelsome.
  Selfishness, indifference to the feelings of others, lack of diligence and a desire for consumer entertainment, tendency to be caring are the characteristic features of the illegitimate teenagers who make up this group.
The second group consists of adolescents with distorted needs who try to imitate children who have openly anti-social orientations in relationships and views.
Distinguished by intense individualism and bullying, these teenagers strive for a privileged position, oppress the weak and the younger ones.
 Their nature is characterized by impulsivity, instability, rapid mood swings.
  This group of teenagers is characterized by intense self-love, stubbornness, distrust of people, lack of diligence.
The third group of "difficult" adolescents is characterized by a conflict between "distorted" positive demands, relationships and "views".
 These teenagers are aware of the ugliness of their transgressions.
  However, their morally correct views have not turned into beliefs; selfish tendencies to get pleasure or inability to react to situations lead to anti-social actions, and these lead to the accumulation of experience of immoral behavior.
 Adolescents in this group are known for their showy courage, lies, indifference to public benefit, distrust, and the habit of praising their past.
The 4th group consists of adolescents with slightly distorted needs, whose characteristic features are stubbornness, lack of self-confidence.
The next group includes teenagers who accidentally take the path of transgressions.
  Children in this group are hardworking, punctual, have a sense of shame, but are reluctant, easily influenced.
The main way of educating the first group of adolescents is to rely on their personal qualities, such as zeal, perseverance in achieving the set goal, striving for prestige and superiority, which are combined with a factual realization of their social inferiority.
Of particular importance to the second group of adolescents is the change in the actual situation, the way they react.
 It is necessary for them to organize a working situation in which they will be able to express themselves.
For the third group, the rhythm and intensity of the work, their involvement in search activities, where they have the opportunity to occupy a significant place.
 Involvement of group 5 adolescents in the system of charitable work activity actively promotes their interest in life, positive mental states, awakening ideas about vital prospects.
  Identifying the types of "difficult" adolescents allows not only to clarify the whole system of educational influences, but also to open the way for each child in a situation of acute conflict to show an individual approach.
  At the same time, it should be noted that the work done from case to case could not be effective.
  In order to involve adolescents in community service, consistent and planned work should be done, which should be organized taking into account their specifics.
  Only such a purposefully constructed system can gradually lead to the elimination of children's antisocial behavior.
Family-school complementary cooperation is of key importance at this age, which is problematic in itself and is crucial in many issues.
In our opinion, there is no doubt that the parents and other adult members of the family are responsible for the upbringing of the child in the family.
  However, there is no denying the fact that they may have little pedagogical knowledge.
 That is why we consider the intervention of a relevant specialist necessary.
  Paul Natorp, the founder of social pedagogy, who attaches great importance to family upbringing, rightly stated: "In order for family upbringing to be effective, it is necessary to help the family, for which a qualified specialist is needed, who is familiar with the peculiarities of family upbringing.
  That specialty is social pedagogue; he comes to the family from school, from the main structure of social education ”1.
We also consider it significant that the work with difficult children (adolescents) necessarily implies rehabilitation, which is characterized as a process of precautionary or behavioral deviations.
  The social pedagogue հարցեր has questions: how to change the child's attitude towards the people around him, towards work, which can motivate him to a positive action, how to lead the teenager to self-education, self-education, etc.
  In the process of rehabilitation, the task of the social pedagogue is to develop tolerance, attention and restraint in adolescents.
  In the initial stage of the work, the social pedagogue studies the adolescent, psychologically prepares him for the change of his behavior, compiles a psychological map.
 In the next stage, the positive qualities and features of the trainee are accumulated.
  It is very possible that at this stage the educator oversees the process and, in the event of even minor progress, praises the child and pushes him or her to make further changes.
  The main goal of a social pedagogue in working with "difficult" children (adolescents) is to help children overcome the crisis և to change their life independently2.
 It is possible that at this stage the trainee will learn to evaluate his actions, their positive-negative sides, reasons, will be able to find behavioral ways on their own.
In the next stage of rehabilitation, self-education takes place, when the trainee has to come out of the crisis stage on his own.
In the process of rehabilitation of "difficult" teenagers it is possible to use A. Makarenko's experience, his "method of explosion".
 The "explosion" is a means when the social pedagogue abruptly destroys, "explodes" the wrong position of the educator.
  The one who is brought up in that moment of confusion loses the previous confidence in his position, և not clearly realizing his step, accepts the new path offered to him3.
3 See Harutyunyan N., Social pedagogy, lecture package.
 When educating teenagers, we consider A. a golden rule. Petrovsky's idea that we have brought as This method should be used with caution, taking into account the age, individual characteristics of the trainee և the state of mind in which he finds himself.
We consider parenting behavior as an effective way to rehabilitate these children, their inclusion in the team of high-achieving classmates, which will help them to reconsider their behavior and the need to acquire more important knowledge.
When working with difficult children (adolescents) you need to remember a few preconditions that will help you succeed: 1. Establishing contact with the adolescent so that communication allows him / her to be recognized (discovered), 2. Recognition (discovery) of the child - to know his thoughts, aspirations, future plans, 3. Build positive relationships that will help you in your recovery.
It is necessary to show an individual approach to all children, regardless of whether they are "difficult" or not, it will allow the child to realize his individuality, teach him to manage his own behavior, emotions, correctly assess his strengths, weaknesses and work on them.
In conclusion, we consider it necessary to mention a few characteristic points. First, before qualifying a child as "difficult", it is always necessary to clearly understand the simple fact that he is a child, regardless of any characteristics, then to consider the age range in which the child is in adolescence. , crisis stage, the most characteristic is the fact that blaming, reprimanding, giving a "bad" qualification for something is always easier than understanding, helping and supporting.
 Therefore, the first rhetorical approach to such children should begin with the formation of our adult consciousness. It is necessary to always remember that no matter what, he is a child, he needs the necessary approach, advice, help, support that he expects from adults, this is where it comes from. mutual trust, which is the basis for discussing issues, where the role of parents and teachers is even greater.
Finally, it should be remembered that this is temporary, at the end of the age crisis the child's problems end, if, of course, adults can influence, help and support at the right time, with the right means.
source. "One should not compare the child with other children, always compare him with himself" (see "Encyclopedia of Special Education", edited by R. Azaryan, Yerevan, 2012, p. 200).
Kristine Safaryan EDUCATIONAL CHARACTERISTICS OF "DIFFICULT" CHILDREN (ADOLESCENTS) Keywords: "difficult" child, behavioral features, adolescent, crisis phase, internal conflict, individual approach, support, distraction, support, support.
