STRUCTURAL TYPES OF VERBAL DICTIVE COMPOSITIONS ACCORDING TO DOG'S CREATIONS
  They are so ingrained in our everyday, non-everyday conversations, in the media, in all sorts of works, that they seem to have been digested for a long time, but in reality it turns out that the rapid rotation of some phrases does not mean that everything is like a "chase".
 In order to be closer to this field, to understand it more deeply, to make the public aware, in this work we will refer to the structural types of Armenian two-component verbal phrases, try to present their application in speech as much as possible.
  The dove greatly benefited from the inexhaustible wealth of popular language phrases.
  He has special attitudes towards phrases, which endow the word with imagery, expressiveness and popularity. Of particular interest is the study of the types of structures of phrases.
  We did the work by analytical-descriptive method.
 Analytical, as we have analyzed the phrases according to the idiomatic distribution of the components և descriptive, as we have presented their semantic peculiarities, dialectal and idiomatic versions և etc.
There are disagreements in Armenian linguistics on the definition of a phrase, the separation of its types and other issues.
  Different definitions of the phrase are given, the first of which belongs to M. Abeghyan.
  According to the reflections, they arise from the free connections of words with a change of meaning. "Such meaningful connections of words are usually called phrases, which, however, take on the meaning of a word մի can համար be considered a complex word" 1.
P. Bediryan, combining the existing definitions in the linguistic literature, gives the following definition of the phrase. "Phrase is a stable, ready-to-reproduce, reinterpreted connection of words, where the independence of the component words is feminine, the syntactic connection is obscured" 2.
 He 1 Abeghyan M., Theory of the Armenian language, Yerevan, 1965, p. 151.
2 Bediryan P., Phraseology of Modern Armenian, Yerevan, 1973, p. 5.
examines the above-mentioned characteristic features of the phrase separately, bringing relevant examples.
In modern Armenian there are different bases for differentiating a phrase, according to the idiom of the main component, according to the number of components, etc.
  When classifying the meaning of the main component, the fact is taken into account that the components of the phrase perform equally. Some of them are the bearers of the main meaning of the phrase, and others are the means of its expression. The former are called the main component.
Concepts expressing a concept, according to the main component of speech-group belonging, are verbal, nominal, macabre1.
Nominal has its subtypes: noun, adjective, date, pronoun.
Verbal two-component phrases.
 Almost all parts of a word can be supplemented by a verb: the noun with almost all its syllables, the adjective, the number, the pronoun, the macabre, the connection (with the connected word), even with its faceless parts.
  There are sounds taken in the nominal sense: "Woe to my homeless mare" (2-169) 2.
 That is, the verb, as a complement, has the greatest potential in terms of connectivity.
 This is the main reason that verb phrases are the most common.
 Another feature of verb conjunctions is that, unlike those with the value of other parts of speech, which form part of a sentence in speech, verbs, due to the verb component, can be bowed հանդես to speak independently in speech, especially volumes, to form a complete sentence, ie hand bring communication value.
Verbal phrases have the property of having all the conjugations of the verb conjugation.
  Let us give such examples to get a phrase.
I am afraid to touch, it seems to me that it is a vision, as soon as I touch it, it will disappear (2-9).
Yes, they will not touch (2-162).
  However, there are phrases that are formed with a limited number of verbs, as they do not have all the causative verbs of the component verbs.
  Thus, "The candy will stick to his head," says my mother (2-117).
  "Let your house be built! Your tongue is not sharp either (2-239)."
 - Yes, I will die, write, what (2-263).
In the manuscripts we have studied, it is common to listen to things, to understand the origins of the phrases, to touch the forbidden imperatives of the phrases.
 Like, "O people, listen to my words, otherwise he is a prisoner" (2-347).
  - He will not die, stay tuned, I will not leave him hungry (2-462).
  - Well, don't worry, the grandmother is angry (2-83).
  With that song they begged God not to touch the king's hand… (2-139).
Some of the phrases are composed only with a negative egg, such as: - Yes, the teacher does not have a worker, he must eat your eggs…. (2-232).
There are verbs that appear in phrases only with this or that derivative form (adjective, subjunctive, etc.) 3.
 Thus, these Maccabean phrases are few in number, but they are singled out as separate, they are not included in the nouns.
2 Here հետո In the following paragraph, after the examples given to substantiate the theoretical questions, the page where the example was found will be indicated in parentheses in the usual way.
3 In the originals we have studied, only rs with a derivation are found.
"Where did you find the fugitive?" asked Simon (2-27).
  You see a man pulling a crocodile (2-199).
There are many two-component verb phrases that have the value of a conjugation phrase.
  Thus, "Oh, if you love your soul, talk enough," said his uncle angrily (2-47).
 "The miller Ivan is building Heriknaz's house, long live him!" Some rejoiced (2-100).
Many phrases, as if linguistic units, have a relative grammatical value, such as: Now we do not know where it is, we went and looked, we did not find…. (2-337).
There are quite a number of connections, which in different verbal environments sometimes appear as ordinary relative verbs, calling actions without figurative-allegorical meaning, and sometimes as phrases.
 Thus, Hama Karo also has his stomach ache, - says the uncle, looking sadly at my mother (2-28).
  What is underlined in this passage is a phrase, as it is used figuratively to mean "intention, to have a goal."
One complains that he has not eaten for seven years since the headache, the other complains that he has a stomach ache and his stubborn heart hurts J. (2-277).
  In contrast to the previous section, what is underlined in this section is a connection of the direct problem's to the verb's, not a phrase, as it literally calls the action.
Thus, simple relations have some differences in comparison with phrases.
  The phrase can have a relative value, but not every verb is a phrase yet.
  First of all, they differ in the semantic side.
 The conjunctions of non-phrases are mostly nouns, put in a straight line, even without a clause1, while phrases often have other parts of speech, both straight and oblique.
 And finally, the syntax of the former is more stable than that of the latter.
"Verb + noun" two-component phrases.
  These are the vast majority of verb phrases, as the noun is associated with the verb in all conjunctions.
  The verb և noun can have various additions, that is why the most voluminous verb phrases belong to this structural type2, in the general phrase the phrase can contain several noun phrases.
Let's present the templates with which the verb forms verb two-component phrases according to the noun syllables. a) by direct line. "Oh, my baby's heart was torn," said my mother (2-80).
  When the heart is torn, it is found that the heart is cracked in the same way, which has the meaning of "severe fear". "The same phrase, composed of words or phrases belonging to the literary or dialectal vocabulary. Wherein these component words are identical; when substituting each other, the general literal meaning of the phrase remains unchanged." 3, thus. 1 M is left less than fear. Abeghyan noticed that the connection loses its wholeness when the noun conjunction gets an article (see Abeghyan M., p. 173).
2 It is beyond the scope of our study to examine them.
3 Sukiasyan A., Modern Armenian language, Yerevan, 1982, p. 368.
My heart was broken, b) with a tragic syllable, we kept Sato for Aramis, because Aram was written on his forehead (2-19).
  Compositions of this structure are repetitive, mainly to give with the verb. Grandmother Sanam and Imtat blessed the teacher (2-273).
  - In the morning, guys, let's get smart, let's move to J. (2-355), c) with a plaintiff. Verbal two-component phrases make up the vast majority. I will put such a friend on the ground (1-123), d) with an exceptional stem. Aghabek was not so similar, but it seems that you filled his breath (2-683), e) with a practical syllable. - Alas, it will not be with a beautiful heart (2-157), f) with a hymn. Doesn't that offend you, doesn't it diminish in your eyes (1-315)?
There are two-component "verb + noun" two-component phrases, in which the noun can appear in "definite" or "indefinite" terms, that is, get the definite article or be opposed to zero, and the definite article can change the meaning of the phrase or leave it the same.
  Let us refer to such phrases.
The road component of the phrase to keep on the road is found in the dialect-colloquial way of the road in a definite, "indefinite" way.
 All three variants have to wait for the meaning.
  Thus. After keeping a vigorous journey for several days, Marjan finally caught Tigranichord, Mherik (1-136).
 His parents had also died, keeping his way (1-84)… .Sit on the door stone, his neck sits crookedly and keeps going (1-473).
  I am on their way to J. (1-319).
In contrast to the previous phrase, in which the decisive article was not the meaning of the conversion, there are phrases with the template "noun consonant + verb", the noun component of which, receiving a decisive article, completely changes the meaning of the translation.
 Thus, to touch the phrase has to touch, to damage, and to touch the phrase has to give the meaning.
  For example: - Satan's ear is deaf, the fox did not touch the helium (2-122).
 What right do they have to give Karo's hand to J. (2141).
Such phrases are also found in the "exclusive noun + verb" and "practical noun + verb" templates.
  Exclusive և practical syllables do not get a decisive article, but are found in the composition of phrases.
The noun component of the phrase to come from the heart has been used with an exclusive syllable, there are versions of the same noun with a definite negative conjugation of the verb.
  By positive humility it means to be with heart and desire, and by negative humility it means to be against its principles, to falsify.
 How: And whatever happens J. Do not say what does not come from your heart…. (1-192).
 And it's my dissatisfaction that comes from everyone's heart (1-235).
Thus, to be with the heart լինել to be with the heart (the heart was used with the practical syllable) have the same meaning: to like, to approve of the meaning, just as the girl you like may not be to her liking ((1-108).
  … .Davo dear, the girl must be to your liking…. (1-108).
"Verb + pronoun" և "verb + year" two-component phrases.
 Pronouns in the semantic sense of their syllables are related to the same order of the verb as nouns, with the difference that they have a more limited possibility of connectivity, especially structure, than nouns (the reason is the expression of specific concepts of pronoun-grammatical features).
  That is why the phrases "verb + pronoun" do not differ from the structural point of view from the phrases "verb + noun".
  Let's mention phrases with pronouns. a) by sexual intercourse; The grandmother kept what she said and chitum (2-55), b) with a tragic syllable. The child will be satisfied with that and will gather himself (1100), c) with a practical syllable. Another volley erupts from the far depths of the gorge, the people pass each other (2-148).
The phrase "verb + year" is completely identical to the "verb + noun" structures, as the year is pronounced there1.
"Bai + makbay" և "verb + adjective" two-component phrases.
  Phrases of the structural type "Bai + macbay" differ from "bay + noun" in terms of volume, because unlike the noun, macbay itself rarely gets additions.
Verbal two-component phrases are formed by the following macabres: Forward - Life moves fast, demands change… developed personnel emerge (1-342).
 Back - Well, he likes not to be behind us in anything (2-129).
 From where the landlord Simon arrived վրա (2-251).
In - Ivan also wanted to fall in (2-171).
  Out - Welcome to Murazid, I leave excitedly (2-96).
 Cons - Your house will be built, what is there to face J. (2-257).
 In terms of circumstances - He searched, fell down, did not find anything, he was looking for something (2-239).
 Our president also fell a lot, did not find anything, did not come to me 2- (2-670).
 With duplicates - After sowing our field, it does not do anything near Karoin… (2-185).
  Did you see that your new power is flying up… (2-532).
This same structural type is represented by the phraseological connections "verb + adjective", where the adjective additions have a macabre use, that is, they have a case meaning, such as: Well, are we next door to each other so that we do not reach each other in the narrow place (2-80).
 Thus, the two-component verb phrases "bai + makbay" և "verb + adjective" belong to the same structural type.
Derbayan և purely verbal two-component phraseological connections.
 Derivative conjunctions include indefinite conjugations of indefinite conjugations, conjunctions 2, conjunctions, subjunctive conjunctions, which from a syntactic point of view are derivatives.
  Their characteristic feature is that most of them represent the private uses of verb conjunctions.
 Thus, with the accompanying derby, "There was a luxurious briefcase under T, and" branded "brand shoes on the feet" (1-128).
  Why should I lose my children's livelihood because of Arshak, who is playing in the Americas in a subordinate derby… (1-82).
  With an indefinite derby, էր He waited anxiously for Ruben's next shot, at the same time fearing that he would notice his tension (1-307).
1 There are no such examples in the originals we have studied.
We have not met an example with 2 accomplices.
All these phrases are separate uses of phrases that represent the general value of the verb.
In purely verbal conjunctions, verb components are equivalent members, between which there is no complementary relation, thus distinguishing not only verbal but other phrases, since there is a complement-complement relation between the vast majority of phrases.
  According to M. According to Abeghyan, we are talking about the phrases that represent "two verb combinations" 1.
The components of the phrase not to listen are only verbs, one (always a derivative) complement to the other, և this connection is related to the "verb + noun" structure, as: But in this case the groom could not listen… (1-139).
Chemuchum to do the phrase, which means "to want indecisively, to whip or not to want, to do gently, to break" 2, also belongs to the "verb + noun" structure, the component of "whisper" of which is the negative of the first singular of the verb. from the conjugation, where the not has appeared in the vowel-modified form (the e is lip-synced, taking the m-to-whom), which are joined by a syllabic conjunction.
  Thus. Our President does not hesitate… (1-416).
It is found in the same way as in the relative letter, without sound. I am not my uncle and he did not want to take the money (2-114).
 Է He is stubborn, he does not bow down… (1-176).
Let's talk about giving and taking verbs.
 When it is used to give a բ instead of to buy something else, to exchange meaning, it has no translational value, there is no reinterpretation of the components.
 However, the same relationship has the same allegorical meaning: to speak, to argue, to consult, to exchange thoughts, as: The girls came to each other, whispered, gave and took (1-491).
It is already a phrase with this meaning.
A. Abrahamyan thoroughly studied these verbs in a morphological sense, calling them "parallel relations" 4, and Al. Margaryan went deeper into the examination of the question, not only in a grammatical, but also in a syntactic sense, calling it parallel verbs5.
Thus, the verb forms a phrase with almost all parts of speech.
 "Verb + noun" phrases make up the vast majority of verb phrases, which are followed by "verb + verb", "verb + maccabee", "verb + adjective", and then "verb + pronoun" և "verb + year" connections.
Listen to the pigeon from everyday conversations, how he created new adventures, which were used in his works.
There are 6 places in the dictionary with the following phrases: to throw in bed, to knead, to beat, to cut your tongue, to cut off your name, to cook dinner, etc.
I will cut off your name և I will tear your tongue, the phrases have the meaning of curse (threatening, reprimanding), such as: - Girl, hey, cut your name, go home (21 See Abeghyan M., pp. 173-174.
2 Sukiasyan A., Galstyan S., Phraseological Dictionary of the Armenian Language, Yerevan, 1975, p. 489.
3 Ibid., Pp. 553-554.
4 See Abrahamyan A., The verb in modern Armenian, Yerevan, 1962, pp. 190-199.
5 See Margaryan Al., The adjacent verbs of the Armenian language, Yerevan, 1966, pp. 279-292.
6 See A. Sukiasyan, S. Galstyan.
547).
 I will tear your tongue, once you have said such a thing (2-457).
 It should be noted that the latter is found in other authors, I will cut your tongue in a way.
The phrase changya (chanka) to beat the phrase is found in the pigeon's works also to weaken the changha (both are specific to dialects) - to talk, to lengthen with meaning, J. The laying eggs are bought in the villages, of course, beating each egg holder for several hours…. (1-50).
 It would be a shame if the woman did not relax and fall into it (1-487).
Putting the dough, which has the meaning of preparing a work in advance, is also dialectal: J. The boys of Borikents have long since put their leaven (1-257).
We have singled out such connections found in Aghavni's works, which did not find a place in the lexical dictionary.
  Thus, the orphan's cradle is broken, dear mother, the orphan should say: "I ask," God will say. "Where am I?" (2-9).
 … That man will grow up safely, hold the knife left by his father (2-11).
  It was spread throughout the village that the Russian Ivan had given Karo a stake… (2-101).
 "Well, what have you done to the shepherd?" Rebuked his brother (2-134).
Thus, the examination of the structural types of the phrases of the Pigeon works is useful from the point of view of revealing and evaluating the author's language, its popularity and expressiveness.
 The phrases he created contribute to the development of phraseology.
Mariam Hakobjanyan STRUCTURAL TYPES OF VERY COMPONENT COMPONENTS ACCORDING TO DOG CREATIONS Keywords: verb phrase, two-component phrase, adjective, main component, conjunction, meaning, part, conjunction, meaning.
