INVALIDITY OF TRANSACTIONS CONTRARY TO THE BASIS OF LAW AND MORALITY "A transaction that has been deliberately made in order to contradict the rule of law or morality is void" (Russian Civil Code, Article 169).
 It is obvious that the Russian city. This norm is enshrined in the Code, as transactions that contradict the basis of the rule of law և morality, are serious և dangerous violations of the current legislation, are of anti-social nature և touching state, public interests.
 An anti-social transaction creates legal liability for the guilty party, so this norm should also be provided by our legislation, as not envisaging such a norm leads to the restriction of opportunities to fight against the abuse of rights in a civil way1.
The norm on immoral, inadmissible contracts is also provided by the French city. day. In Article 6.
  Kazakhstan's legislation protects Tsliov from making transactions that do not comply with the law.
 Thus, according to the mouse. According to Article 158 of the Code, a transaction whose content does not comply with the requirements of the legislation is invalid, as well as a transaction that has been made on the grounds of illegality and morality2.
Transactions that violate public interests can be described as anti-social, but we do not find a specific term "anti-social transaction" in the city of Russia. in the Code, nor in other normative legal acts.
 Only the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation in its 2004 The decision № 226-О of July 8 states that the Russian city. Article 169 of the Code specifically distinguishes between invalid and dangerously anti-social transactions, which contradict the foundations of the rule of law, are void, and determine the consequences of their invalidity.
 Thus, according to the Russian mouse. According to Article 169 of the Code, a transaction made in order to contradict the "morality" of the rule of law is anti-social.
  The anti-social orientation of transactions that pose a threat to the state's economic security, such as foreign trade transactions of legal entities, when under the name of one product mentioned in the license (eg under the name of all metals), is rarely sold abroad 1 See Barseghyan T., Civil Law of the Republic of Armenia, part A, 3rd edition, Yerevan, 2006, p. 235.
 Ioffe O., Soviet Civil Law, vol. 1, Leningrad, 1958, p. 223. хахматов В., ч. 1, textbook, sub. Ю. Tolstogo, A. Sergeeva, St. Petersburg, 1996, p. 215. “Inadequacy of action.
2 See http.
//akm.sud.kz/sites/default/files/page_docs/9d_.doc.
metal.
  Deals with similar anti-social orientation, the implementation of which poses a threat to public safety, such as weapons, explosives, military-technical transactions, are carried out by an unauthorized person.
  Transactions that endanger the moral character of a nation are antisocial, aimed at violating moral standards, such as those that seek to market ethnic, racially hostile literature1.
The first difficulty that will arise in the case of envisaging this norm by our Code is conditioned by the uncertainty of the categories of "legal order" and "morality", which are decisive for the application of this norm2.
 These categories, such as "intelligence", "honesty", "justice", are evaluative categories, complete with content, depending on how they are interpreted by the participants of the civil circulation և legal practice.
By rejecting the lawsuit, the courts mainly base their decision on the fact that the plaintiffs do not mention what norms the parties have violated regarding the social, economic and social structure of the society.
 Judicial bodies themselves very seldom make attempts to reveal the categories of "morality" and "legal order" in their decisions.
 At the same time, the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation finds that they have a clear definition.
  2014 of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation The definition of "grounds of morality" mentions the notions of June 8, 226-О, as well as other concepts that are considered to be "evaluated".
  It is true that they become meaningful depending on how they are interpreted by the participants in civil law, law enforcement practice, but they are not so vague as to ensure a uniform understanding և application in the relevant regulations.
  The antisociality of the transaction, which gives the court the right to apply the relevant norm of the RF Civil Code, is revealed during the trial by taking into account all the factual circumstances, the nature of the offenses committed by the parties and their consequences.
The plenum of the Supreme Arbitration Court in 2008 According to the decision of April 10, 2012 ("Several questions from the practice of dispute resolution in connection with the application of Article 169 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation"), such type-transactions violate the foundations of the rule of law, society, society, politics, economy and morality.
 For example, the court mentions in the decision the transactions aimed at the production or alienation of certain objects restricted or prohibited in civil circulation (appropriate types of weapons, drugs or other means endangering the life or health of citizens).
Thus, the notion of "grounds of law" refers to the sphere of public interests protected by law, the activity of which should not be violated by a civil law transaction.
  Basis of the rule of law of the state 1 See "Civil Law", p. 1, textbook, sub. А. Kalpina, A. Maslyeva, 2nd edition, Moscow, 2002, page 199.
2 See http.
//www.urprofy.ru/node/364.
These are the basic norms defined by the social, economic, social structure of the society, aimed at preserving and ensuring such a structure, protecting fundamental civil rights and freedoms.
  Provisions related to the Russian legal system are included in the norms of the Criminal Code.
The "morality" category, as mentioned, is also not specific, despite the comments made by the arbitral tribunal.
  Theoretically, the contradiction of morality deals is explained as the implementation of an activity that does not coincide with the notions accepted by the society, which refer to good և evil, justice և proper.
 The requirements of morality, unlike legal requirements, are not enshrined in written norms.
Perceptions of moral categories are interpreted differently by different segments of the population; they may not coincide.
In addition, the assessment of this or that phenomenon changes with the change of public consciousness, as well as with the political and economic changes in the country.
 That is why the inclusion of an anti-social transaction in the legislation is not assessed unilaterally.
 Assuming that "morality" is a qualitatively different social regulator, it is unlikely that a transaction can be considered null and void if it does not meet the requirements of morality, but does not violate the law.
  As for the basic norms of morality that have been formed over the centuries, they have been reflected in the legislation, at present their violation can be considered as a violation of the legislation.
  This criterion should be considered in violation of the law as a circumstance that aggravates the harmfulness of the transaction, which provides a basis for applying more severe consequences for the parties than the usual restitution.
  Thus, as "foundations of morality", one must understand the principles for the exercise of subjective right, which are based on public perceptions of possibility.
Its purpose is considered to be an indicator of an anti-social transaction1.
  According to the Russian city. According to Article 169 of the Code, the transaction must be aimed at obtaining a result, which not only does not comply with the law, but from the point of view of those who observe the rule of law, contradicts the basis of the rule of law - morality.
 Thus, the legislator presupposes the existence of such intent on at least one of the parties, moreover, the intent must include not only the entire content of the transaction (which may comply with the legislation), but also the direction.
 The question arises: is it possible to recognize as antisocial the transactions that, in fact, do not contradict the law, or are deliberately carried out in order to contradict the rule of law and morality?
  For example, can the contract for the sale of such items, with which the crime is to be committed, or the contract for the lease of living space, which is to be used as a place to hide the theft, be included?
  Considering that a) the law does not require the transaction to comply with the requirements of the law, b) the transaction may be qualified by Article 169 of the society 1 See “Textbook of Civil Rights”, p. 1, in order. T. Illarionovoy, B. Гонгало, В. Pletneva, Moscow, 1998, pp. 42-43.
 "Civil Law", textbook, vol. 1, otv. OK. E. Sukhanov, Moscow, 1998, p. 331. Even with one violation of moral grounds, c) confiscated consequences are not applied to the participants of the transaction who acted without intention, the view of the scholars is correct, who consider the application of Article 169 possible when the transaction did not violate the legal requirements.
 In other words, a transaction can be recognized as anti-social if there is at least one sign, that is, it has been made for a purpose that contradicts the foundations of morality.
 The validity of such an approach is confirmed by the fact that in practice the achievement of an illegal goal (for example, tax evasion or illegal transfer of funds abroad) is often done not by one but a number of interrelated transactions, most of which meet all the requirements of the law, but other transactions ( fake և fake) sum, ultimately, leads to an illegal result.
  Thus, the parties to the transaction must want or at least assume the consequences that contradict the basis of the arrogance of the rule of law, ie the plaintiff must indicate what basic social, economic and social norms the parties decided to violate when making the transaction.
The subjective side of the anti-social deal is characterized by the direct or indirect intention of one or both parties.
  Subjectively, anti-social transactions are separated from those that contradict the law (Article 168 of the RF Civil Code).
  As the bases of the legal order are fixed by normative acts, it is impossible to violate them without exceeding the limits of the law.
 But the Russian city. Article 168 of the Code stipulates that all illegal transactions are void, regardless of the subjective party, even if the parties to the contract did not have such an intention.
 That is why the aim of the legislator is not to punish the participant of such a deal, but to return everything to its original state, to eliminate the consequences of the deal.
The objective side of anti-social transactions are serious, especially dangerous violations of the law, which are often criminal activities.
 The scope of transactions that contradict the moral basis of the rule of law is determined in court practice in accordance with other legal acts of the law.
1 See "Civil Law of the Russian Federation", in 2 vols. О. Sadikova, Moscow, 2006.
- the illegal nature, which derives from the socio-economic goals of the parties to the transaction, which contradict the foundations of the rule of law or morality.
An anti-social transaction creates legal liability for the guilty party.
 If both parties to the transaction have the intention, when both parties have made the transaction, all that they have received in the transaction is confiscated in favor of the state, and when one of the parties has made the transaction, all that is received is confiscated in favor of the state. to retaliate for what he did.
 When there is the intention of one party, then all that he has received in the transaction or what he has received in return is confiscated in favor of the state.
 If the transaction is entered into carelessly, it is declared invalid, երկ bilateral restitution takes place.
In order to correctly classify the actions taken by law enforcement agencies, the composition of the anti-social transaction, the objective criteria of its relevance, contradicting the foundations of "rule of law" and "morality", should be considered in mutual relation, as complementary conditions that increase the risk of anti-social transaction.
  For that, we offer a Russian mouse. Article 169 of the Code to provide in our Code կատարել to make a change in the disposition, to replace the link "or" dividing with the link "" of unity, to rewrite it as follows: "The deal, which was deliberately made to contradict the foundations of the rule of law and morality, is null and void."
By the law enforcement bodies of the city of RF. The application of the confiscatory sanction provided for in Article 169 of the Code in connection with the investigations carried out by the investigative subdivisions is necessary both in cases when the crime does not receive the punishment provided by the relevant sanction, and when its application contains difficulties.
 At the same time, the Russian city. The application of the confiscatory sanction provided for in Article 169 of the Code shall be made as a filing of a civil suit in criminal proceedings.
  In connection with this, it is necessary to make clarifications in our Criminal Procedure Code, so that it is possible to file a civil lawsuit related to Article 169 within the framework of the criminal case.
  Proof of the fact of a crime committed in the form of a civil transaction by criminal records և Confirmation by a court decision may only precede the invalidation of the transaction provided for in Article 169.
Thus, transactions that contradict the ethical foundations of the rule of law are illegal actions performed by the subjects of civil law, directed against the restrictions of the exercise of state, public order and subjective law enshrined in normative acts.
 Failure to envisage such an article in the RA Civil Code will lead to the limitation of the opportunities to fight against the abuse of rights in civil legal ways.
Elena Aleksanyan INVALIDITY OF CONTRADICTIONS ON THE BASIS OF LAW AND MORALITY
