NARDOSIAN PERCEPTION OF CRIME AND PUNISHMENT IN "ADAMAMUT" AND "HOPOP" NOVELS In Armenian literature, there has been almost no reference to the problem of Nardosian perception of crime and punishment.
 The topic is noteworthy because Nar-Dos does not go to the crime-punishment relationship in the usual way.
Nar-Dos is an insightful aesthetician-psychologist.
 He, as literary critic A. rightly notes. Terteryan, with his searching, sharp eyes, looks at life, perceives it and creates types 1.
  Vibrant objectivism, which is far from the surface of naturalistic imagery, is characteristic of the style of his novels.
  The author tells the reader a great vital truth, starting from the reality he has witnessed.
Nar-Dos is a research writer.
  He constantly observes life, finds the inner forms of productions, makes them the material of creation.
The researcher St. is right. Topchyan, the heroes of Nar-Dos "are far from one-line, schematic definitions; they can definitely not be evil or good, bad or good, ugly or beautiful."
 The same can be said about the perception of crime and punishment.
  This is not an ordinary, legal perception of the punishment of a crime.
  The psychologist-writer puts the question on another level.
  The writer does not even directly ask about the punishment of a crime, but it is perceptible in the context.
We need to understand two important questions: who is the perpetrator, what is the punishment?
The novel "Adamamutin" is a shocking artistic image.
  The author has experimented with the ways in which a person is exposed as a result of the pressure of social problems.
With a few precise brush strokes, the writer creates the image of the horrible conditions in which the heroes of the novel survive. “That house was a rather large hut that sometimes served as a barn for the owner's milk cows.
  The walls were so damp that there was little water or milk.
  Two of the four windows of a single window high above the ground were broken, and there were papers stuck in them. ”3
 Hunger was the constant companion of the poor family living in this poor hut.
 The cold was oppressing on the other side. "In the autumn և winter months the hunger was not as significant for that poor family as the cold էջ" (p. 144).
1 See Terteryan A., Works, Yerevan, 1980, page 109.
2 Nar-Dos, Poems, pref. Topchyan, h. 1, Yerevan, 1989, page 11.
3 Ibid., P.
 Excerpts from the original novels are from this book with the corresponding pages in parentheses.
From the very beginning, the image of Shushan, the mother of the family, is outlined.
 In the womb was a small, slender woman.
  He was barely thirty years old, but he already had four children, one of whom was to be born soon.
 "For whom, for what?"
 On what day were those that already existed, that one should be added? ”(P. 108).
 This series of rhetorical questions, which the author raises at the beginning of the novel, then at the end of the novel, must be heard in a unique way from the lips of the heroine.
The writer opens new layers step by step in the novel, answering the question "what day were they already in?"
  The eldest son, Sedrak, had escaped from the house, despite his young age, and had been imprisoned several times.
  As a psychologist, Nar-Dos perfectly understands, describes the way of life of other children, the characteristic features of their psychology.
 Here are the two little ones huddled under an antique. "The rooster was like a rooster, and the children sheltered from it were like chickens" (p. 109).
  And when the door slammed shut more than usual, they immediately pulled their heads out from under the blanket, looking at the door as if they were waiting for someone.
  And they were waiting for their older sister, Sone, or rather, the fried bread.
 Such a deep understanding of child psychology gives a powerful impetus to the novel.
  The following episodes (the children's joy at seeing the bread brought by their sister ("They forgot the cold because they saw the bread"), Sone's proud happiness that he brought bread with the bread, the innocent fight of the children for bread, the tangible reconciliation) are proof of this.
Nevertheless, the culmination of the novel is the last part.
 After a stormy night in Adamamut, Shushan strangles the newborn baby with her own hands, convinced that her death is much more comforting than living.
By killing one, he saves the other three. "What am I doing? What am I doing? Do I lack? How can I treat you? How can I treat you?" (P. 116).
At first glance, it seems that the author does not condemn anything, only indifferently records the event, tries to maintain the eloquent and indifferent manner of the outside viewer.
 But under the guise of external indifference, it is difficult to notice the secretly expressed complaint and grief.
  Finally, the issue of the punishment of a crime is perceptible in the context.
Nar-Dos was wonderfully acquainted with Russian literature և, of course, F. Dostoevsky's "Crime և Punishment" should have had a certain influence on him1.
But Nar-Dos puts the problem on a slightly different level.
  According to F. Dostoevsky, if there is a crime, then there is a punishment, no goal justifies the means.
 Acceptance of the crime և punishment: F. Dostoevsky's perception refers to both legal and moral, psychological levels.
 There is a crime in Nar-Dos novel, but there is no legal punishment.
  The perception of Nardosyan punishment is only in the moral sphere.
 The mother killed her own child. This is a crime that includes punishment.
 No legal punishment can be more severe.
The writer does not go into details, does not describe great psychological changes, this is natural.
 Nar-Dos could not accommodate such great psychological shifts in one novel area as F. Dostoevsky in the novel.
 Moreover, if we are careful, we can notice that F. The plot of Dostoevsky's novel is not rich in events.
 The material of the novel, in fact, can be one story 1 It is noteworthy that in the novel "Anna Saroyan" F. is mentioned. Dostoevsky's name.
 See NarDos, pp. 453-454.
Exhausted within the framework of consumption.
 But instead of actions, the plot develops based on psychological analysis և self-analysis.
  In Nar-Dos novel, the heroine's self-analysis is limited to only one sentence. "What do I do? What do I do? Do I have little? Do I care for you? How do I care for you?" (P. 116).
  But that is enough to understand the whole depth of his psychodrama.
 Nar-Dos does not explain, he leaves it to the reader.
 An accurate sentence becomes the key to the whole work, the epicenter of ideology.
 And here the novel wins.
After all, who is to blame, who is the perpetrator?
 The lily?
 And maybe the need?
 The most greedy, avid need?
 Both of them!
 But the type of the weak man is more guilty, the type of a man who does not fight and surrenders.
 In the social conflicts dictated by life, a person either perishes because he is reluctant or is able to overcome them because he is willful.
The title of the novel is remarkable.
  We think that the title of the crime and punishment, "Adamamut", aims to aggravate the contradiction (day of birth-infant death).
We consider it necessary to note that the last part of this Nar-Dos novel has given rise to contradictory comments.
 Thus, researcher G. Hovsepyan writes. "But how much would the story of" Adamut "have benefited from the point of view of realistic performance, if the prose writer had avoided pathophysiology, which is obviously an expression of naturalistic depiction at the end… And, indeed, the ending of the text leaves a bad impression on the reader
  Justice demands to say that while reproducing the content of the whole story, the author came from the truth of life, but in the end did not achieve any result, "the general impression was significantly damaged by it" 1.
  We do not agree with this observation; we have already mentioned in our work that the culmination of the novel is the last part, because here is what the writer has to say.
 In such a detailed description of a horrible crime is hidden the writer's certain attitude towards the depicted material.
 Moreover, it should not be ignored that Nar-Dosayd uses an interesting and, in our opinion, convincing trick while creating the image. The scene of the infant's murder is presented not through the eyes of the author, but through the eyes of the child, Sone.
  This in itself implies such a description of details.
  As for naturalistic images, we can say that naturalism is sometimes necessary for the realization of realism, in this novel it is highly justified.
The issue of crime և punishment is a little different in the novel "Hopop".
 If in the previous novel the factor of social circumstances was certain, then here the priority is to reveal the psychological layers of a person as a unique character2.
From the very beginning of the novel, the gunsmith Asatur is portrayed as "a man in his forties with a worn-out bowel, a leather belt, and a swollen-red face from drunkenness, known throughout the district's bazaar as Hopop" (p. 78).
  The writer opens the meaning of the nickname և that is enough for the hero and 1 Hovsepyan G., Nar-Dos, Yerevan, 1961, pp. 177-178.
2 See Safaryan V., The personality of the writer և image, Yerevan, 2001, pp. 194-195.
to understand "The whole district was nicknamed Hopop by the gunsmith Asatur, based on the popular proverb that says," Hopop smelled himself, he thought the nest smelled. "
  And indeed, Asatur was a very stinking, quarrelsome man ”(p. 81).
 If we add to this the fact that his everyday vocabulary was adorned with selected swear words, the picture will be complete.
  Constant beatings and beatings. This is typical in his life.
 The writer draws attention to the fact that Hopop was very afraid of the police, he was even punished several times in a basement full of big mice.
  In fact, he was punished accordingly for his petty daily sins.
 Another form of punishment was the ridicule of street children and women, which had become commonplace.
  But the writer goes to the deep revelation of the story.
  The man alienated from the society, humiliated in his environment, had to find a place where he could confirm his masculinity. That place becomes the family, the burden of the man's humiliation is echoed on the woman's head.
 Here, as V. notes. Safaryan, one of the typical features of Hopop as a weak person is revealed - self-praise and arrogance1.
Finally, as the author emphasizes several times, during the "ordinary" beating scene, the unexpected happens. The woman breaks the band that ensures the success of Hopop (at least, Hopp himself thought so) և "painted the red wine the color of the blood on the ground" (p. 58).
The picture is impressive because it kind of prepares for the next tragedy. "The hop was shaken, it stopped suddenly.
 It seemed to him that he was twinning.
  His eyes darkened.
  Not knowing what he was doing, he quickly bent down, picked up a large stone from the ground, and threw it at the fleeing woman with extreme fervor ”(p. 86).
 The writer does not go into too much detail, not even mentioning directly whether the woman died or not.
  He finishes the novel with only one sentence, leaving the rest to the reader's imagination. "The roaring street suddenly became silent and froze" (p. 86).
 There is a terrible crime, there must be punishment.
 Although the author does not speak, it is self-evident that there will be a legal punishment.
 The problem is different in the case of moral punishment.
 As in the previous novel, here the crime includes punishment.
Thus, in "Adamamut" և "Hopop" in the novels, Nar-Dos puts the question of the punishment of the crime not directly, but in the context.
  But this is not an ordinary, legal perception.
 The psychologist-writer puts the question on another level.
 The narcissistic perception of crime և punishment refers to the moral level.
  In both novels, a situation is created when the crime includes punishment.
In words։ descriptions, the writer is stingy, he gives more key-sentences, which in fact are much more comprehensive than ordinary, long descriptions and analyzes.
 And such sentences are the result of the writer's amazing observation.
Thanks to these other features, the above-mentioned novels remain alive in the reader's memory.
 And this means that the writer has achieved his goal.
1 See V. Safaryan, p. 195.
Satenik Karapetyan NARDOSYAN'S PERCEPTION OF LIFE AND PUNISHMENT IN "ADAMAMUT" AND "HOPOP" IN NOVELS Keywords: novel, crime, criminal, punishment, legal level, moral level, context.
