Գ. Գ. MARQUEZ'S LOVE IN MOLECULAR'S NOVEL TRANSLATION METHODS AND THEIR ROLE IN TRANSLATION The translation tools have been discussed by many linguists, who have emphasized their role and place in translation.
 These means are many; they are used both in the case of direct and indirect translation.
  In our work we have referred to the cases in which the following translation means have been used: substitution (transposition), modification (modulation), equivalence (equivalence) և adaptation (adaptation) 1.
  Substitution in translation is the replacement of one part of a word without changing the meaning by another part of the word.
  This method is applicable in both Javelin and one language, but we are interested in its role in translation.
Ծանր He left in the hard, sombre English furnituremade of wood that sighed in the icy cold of dawn… (p. 84) He in English: He kept in place the hard, sombre English furnituremade of wood that sighed in the icy cold of dawn… (p. 84) Conserve in situ amanecer… (p. 149).
A typical example of a replacement is Spanish: He left the heavy and sturdy English furniture, the wood of which creaked from the horrible cold of the morning… English: He left the heavy and strong English furniture made of wood, which creaked from the horrible cold of the morning….
  The subjunctive verb in Armenian has been replaced by the verb in English, in Spanish, the past tense verbs were used.
  Or in Armenian - wood, in English - made of wood, and in Spanish - wood.
 Armenian and English have replaced the original noun with an adjective.
Let's do it in parallel: early morning of English: of dawn ~ Spanish: del amanecer. In the translation, he made only Armenian, replacing the noun with an adjective, and Spanish and English endowed the noun with an adjective, adding in front of it a preposition indicating belonging: English: of, Spanish: de (el - a definite article).
His main concern was the extremely dangerous lack of hygiene in the city.
  (page 107) ob English: His obsession was the dangerous lack ofsanitation in the city. (p. 84) ~ իսպ. `The obsession was the sanitary sanctuary of the city. (p. 149).
In the Armenian translation the original adjective has been replaced: Peligroso estado sanitario ~ dangerous lack of sanitation ան extremely dangerous lack of hygiene 1 See Vine Ж, Darbelьne,, Technical abilities of translation, .
յություն.
  The translation from Spanish is a dangerous sanitary condition, in English - a dangerous lack of hygiene.
  In English և in terms of Armenian's speech, hygiene ~ sanitary has been replaced.
 In the Armenian translation, the replacement was accompanied by a semantic definition, that is, the original dangerous sanitary condition means the extremely dangerous lack of hygiene.
In addition, the main adjective հայերեն excessive macabre has been added to the Armenian language, which further emphasizes the level of concern ությունը the danger of lack of hygiene in the city.
  Marquez wrote this sentence in the following way: His concern was the dangerous sanitary condition of the city.
  When combining the sentences, the influence of the English translation on the Armenian translation is noticed, hence the word absence (English: less).
 The translation, in any case, did not suffer.
One example of exactly the same type. hmt .: He is equally concerned about the lack of hygiene in the public market ... (p. 109) He English: He was just as concerned with the lack of hygiene at the public market ... (p. 86) ~ Spanish: Suestado higiénico del Public market ... (p. 152).
Lack of hygiene ~ the lack of hygiene ~ el estado higiénico, where another word is used in English (synonym san sanitation ~ hygiene, similar to Spanish).
  It is interesting that, being a different sentence, it is the same, the Armenian translation again used the absence word unit in Spanish instead of the word unit condition.
The last two examples are similar not only in structure (corresponding to each language) but also in meaning.
He did not even think that Fermina Daza was married… (p. 162) ~ English: He did not even stop to think about the obstacle of her being married… (p. 129) ~ in Spanish: Ni siquiera se puso a pensar en el inconsistent in that it ue (p. 221).
The substitution in this example is reflected in the Armenian conjugation, with a footnote, placed in front of the noun in Spanish և in English (obstacle) (although one should not have thought about Fermina Daza's obstacle to marriage).
  There is a complex subordinate clause in Armenian, բառերը the words obstacle (in English), inconvenience (in Spanish) are omitted, and in English և in Spanish it is simple and spacious, they translate into English, he did not even care to think about the obstacle of getting married. He did not even care about the inconvenience of being married.
The following is different in the Armenian translation, do not even think about it մտ he did not even stop to think նույնիսկ nisiquiera se puso a pensar (he did not even care to think). Moreover, in the Armenian translation there is a phrase unit in the footnote, it went through the mind.
The Armenian translation is done in a unique way, despite all this, the meaning of the original is preserved.
"Coffee is poisonous," he said.
  (page 187) said English: He said.
  "Coffee is poison". (p.149) ~ in Spanish: Dijo.
 "El café es veneno". (p. 254).
Armenian and English have replaced the compound footnote with the noun, it is poison է is poison, while in the original it is expressed by the adjective es veneno.
He had left without making a scene… (p. 232) ~ English: She had left with noscandal p (p. 186) ~ Spanish: Se había ido sin escándalo… (p. 313).
The noun in Armenian has been replaced by the noun in English and Spanish.
 While he should have been, he left without a scene that would give way to a wise perception.
The author used the word "scene" instead of the word "scandal", the English translation is similar to the original, because in English this word unit expresses the same contextual meaning as in the original.
"The only thing I am interested in is love," he said.
 (p. 165) Love English: "Love is theonly thing that interests me," he said (Love is the only thing that interests me). (p.131) ~ in Spanish: Lo único que me interesa es el amor - dijo (The only thing that interests me is love). (p. 224).
In this sentence, the substitution is made in Armenian with the conjugation verb - substation derby, with the interest ~ interests ~ interesa.
It is confirmed that in case of translation of non-subject sentences into Spanish, sentences with subordinates are mandatory in English և Armenian, he said ~ he said ~ dijo.
։ Fleeing from popular festivities, he went to eat at Hildebranda Farm.
  (page 234) ~ English:… and one afternoon he escaped from publicfestivities to have lunch at Hildebranda's ranch. (p. 187) ~ իսպ. ՝ sees a seesapó method of suckling to catch the Hildebranda hacienda. (p. 315).
The use of substitution in this case is due to the fact that in the Armenian translation is added the verb "went" in the past tense, which requires an escape to express the meaning of the original, the derivation phrase, which plays the role of clarifying the meaning.
Giving the Armenian translation (derby), it was replaced by English: escaped (bowed verb) և Spanish: escaped (bowed verb).
Patching and finishing the socks, he filled the basket with everything, made orders for dinner in the kitchen and went to the bedroom.
(page 246) ~ English: When she finished darning the socks, she tossed everything into theto the bedroom. (p. 197) ~ իսպ.: When the term zurcir the media echó la cosasfue al dormitorio. (p. 331).
In the Armenian translation, the substitution was again made in the derivative phrase, patching-ending ~ when she finished ~ cuando terminó de zurcir, while in English պան in Spanish it is equivalent to the secondary subordinate clause of time.
Randomly present in the conversation (p. 74)… English… who happened to betaking part in the conversation (p. 57) ~ in Spanish:… que participaba por casualidad en laconversación (p. 104).
In this example, the translator has already performed its function in the English translation. The noun + preposition has been replaced by the verb happened to be ~ por casualidad.
  The Armenian translation did not use the equivalent parts of either Spanish or English at all, a horse macabre is used here, incidentally.
The glorious dawn coming from the only open window had barely begun to illuminate the stuffy, cluttered room 5 (p. 5) the At one window the splendor ofdawn was just beginning to illuminate the stifling, crowded room… (p. 1) ~ Spanish: Elabierta … (P. 11).
In the Armenian translation, the substitution was used with the glorious adjective (glorious dawn), in front of which the English's Spanish's glorious glorification (literally translated, the glorification of the dawn).
In translation, a measure called modulation is the conversion of a message from a certain angle.
  In other words, the translation may be grammatically accurate but contrast with the spirit of the language.
 In such cases, modulation helps.
They were not in love with their father, because they had found a way to live together without disturbing each other.
  (page 129) relationship English: Her relationship with herfound the way to live together without bothering each other. (p. 102) ~ իսպ.` Lasaunque ambos habían encontrado el modo de vivir juntos sin estorbarse. (p. 178).
In the above example, the verb is placed in the negative, sirovchein, and in English, Spanish, no, had lacked affection և carecían deafectos.
  If the Armenian translation was done like the two of them, their father's relationship was devoid of love, it would turn out to be a grammatically correct sentence, but foreign to Armenian.
  Consequently, the Armenian translation by modulation (in this case putting the verb in the negative) corresponded the sentence to the spirit of the Armenian language.
This example is so remarkable that in addition to modulation, the other means of translation used is substitution.
  In Armenian, it was possible to find an expression of the same structure with the meaning of the phrase "love" in neither English nor Spanish.
  Her relationship with her fatherhad lacked affection ¨ las relaciones con su padre carecían de afectos The sentences are both equivalent in meaning and in translation և composed according to the rules of their own language.
 The Armenian translation, as is often the case, has changed the way of rendering, preserving the meaning, the relations with the father were devoid of love (English-Spanish), replacing them with a lack of love in their relations, from which it can be assumed that the translation is according to Armenian language thinking.
The Spanish adjective's lacking (were in love) has been replaced in the Armenian translation by the noun "in love" (they were not).
In the afternoon, after a painting class, he allowed himself to be taken to the city to show off.
 (page 130) ~ English: In the afternoon, after the painting classes, she allowed herselfto be taken out to see the city. (p. 103) ~ իսպ.` For the tars, deprived of the classes of painting, hac haa llevar a la calle to conocer la ciudad. (p. 180).
Modulation in this sentence is manifested in the structure of the sentence, in the Armenian translation the given sentence is complex.
  And in English and Spanish it is simple and spacious.
In Armenian, the footnote of the main sentence is expressed in the case of allowed verb, in Spanish the footnote is expressed in the form of the verb se hacíallevar, which acts as a causal verb.
In English, it is a conventional structure, that is, she allowed herself to be taken out, literally translated.
This was a typical step for Don Leo XII Loise.
  (page 162) լ English: It was a decisiontypical of Don Leo XII Loayza. (p. 129) ~ իսպ. `Era uni tisi tópica de don León XIILoayza. (p. 221).
Modulation in the Armenian translation is manifested in the indirect problem and determination of the subordinate և subjunctive: Don Leo XII Loayza is typical, while in English and Spanish they are typical, typical of Don LeoXII Loayza ¨ típica de don León XII Loayza.
 We can assume that the modulation is expressed in the syntax.
She was more beautiful than ever, but more than ever far from her, though she understood why, until she noticed the curve of her belly protruding from under her dress… (p. 150) ՝ English: He found her more beautiful and youthful than ever, but more lost to himthe belly under the silk tunic ... (p. 120) ~ իսպ.` La contontró más bella y juvenil quecurva de su vientre bajo la tunica de seda ... (p. 207).
There is no modulation in this sentence in the Armenian translation, it is expressed in English, but since it is related to the material being analyzed, let us present this example as well.
  In the Armenian translation and in Spanish it is expressed in negative, but in English it is not.
  Եւ until hesaw և hasta no ver.
  Although in the English translation it was possible to use the word unless, which has the meaning of և, which fully corresponds to the corresponding unit of the original.
He is a wonderful example of modulation: And he did not break his promise.
  (page 165) And English: And he did. (p. 131) ~ in Spanish: Así fue. (p. 225).
The negative sentence in the Armenian translation is semantically equivalent, moreover, in English the affix is ​​not a conjugated verb, but an auxiliary verb replacing that verb, that is, the English, in its turn, used the above-mentioned substitution.
 In the original, there is a definite article - fue, the meaning of which և equivalence becomes clear in the text alone.
The given example shows the reader already known situation in the following sentences.
 Simply, the Armenian translation provides a more understandable reference to the previous reference (we learn that a promise was made to do something, the promise was kept), in English ում in the original, respectively, ՝ did so,, happened, from which it is impossible to understand at all. What is it about?
In this paper, the use of another means of translation, equivalence, has been studied.
 It is a very common phenomenon in translation, it refers to the stylistic-structurally disproportionate forms in the language - their replacement by means of one's own language.
For example, it was not a happy thing (p. 161).
 not English: It's not so much. (p. 129) ~ in Spanish: Más es la bulla (was noisy) (p. 220).
Out of context, these sentences do not have semantic equivalents.
  If we translate it literally, English is not a big deal, in other words, it was noisy.
  All three sentences speak of a not-so-important, even tedious phenomenon, which has found its form in different languages.
… But he gave an opportunity to convince himself with the logic, once in a while թեմ they are not born forever on the day they are born from their mother, but life forces them to be reborn again and again.
  (page 162) ~ English:… but heover again to give birth to themselves. (p. 129) ~ իսպ. ՝… pero se dejó llevar por su (p. 221).
Equivalence is expressed in terms of the number of days the mother is born. When translated literally into English and Spanish, it turns out the day their mothers gave birth to them, although in Spanish the verb alumbrar also means light 1.
In all cases, the sentences are complex subordinate clauses, but there are passages that differ from language to language.
  Notice the day the mother was born, where there is a derivation, expressed in Spanish in a complex subordinate: el día en quesus madres los alumbran (the day when mothers give birth).
In the second part of the sentence, the Armenian translation again reveals differences, but here they refer to the structure of the verb, such as to give birth themselves English: to give birth to themselves (literally, to give birth to themselves) ~ Spanish: a parirse a sí mismos (to give birth) themselves).
Proverbs, phrases, blessings, curses, etc. are excellent examples of equivalence.
Here is an example: "They were for a love that went to the writer's bosom," he said.
(page 179) ~ English: "They were for a love that has gone to hell," he said. (p. 143) ~ իսպ. ՝ Eran for a love that is left on the caravan. (p. 243).
The expression in the writer's lap has gone has the English has gone to hell և se lo llevó el carajo (semantically it is the same as the original, but the literal translation is vulgar).
The same situation is described in all three texts, using expressions with completely different meanings, which acquire the given meaning in the given union.
In the Armenian translation, the word kavovin has been added, which is used not so much to provide semantic as to expressive part.
  Hence, from the large number of such examples, we assume that the first meaning of the verb Alumbrar, which is unacceptable for our society, is widespread in Latin American countries: to enlighten, to fill with light.
  It expresses only in the fourth sense - to give birth (http.
//www.wordreference.com/definicion/alumbrar).
օգտագործել Use expressions that are considered vulgar in everyday life.
Some examples of equivalence ևs. "Without him I would have been lost," he said.
(page 188) ~ English: He said.
 "Without her I would be nothing." (Without him I was nothing) (p.150) ~ in Spanish: Dijo.
 "Yo no sería nadie sin ella". (Without him I was nobody) (p. 255).
"When you are ugly and poor, you will wear a tailcoat whether you like it or not."
  (page 258) When English: "When you are ugly and poor, you can only want more". (p. 207) ~ իսպ. ՝ «Al pobre y alfeo, todo se les va en deseo». (p. 347).
Let us pay attention to the fact that a saying is presented in Spanish, which, due to the lack of an equivalent in Armenian, has been changed in the plan of the expression, adapting the meaning to the context as much as possible.
It is literally translated in English: when you are ugly and poor, you can only want more (it is only possible to want, but not to do).
This concern was the result of a political conviction that he liked to repeat it from time to time.
  (page 264) pre English: His preoccupation was consistent with arepetir aun cuando no viniera al caso. (p. 355).
"He is ugly and uninteresting," Fermina told Daza, "but he is head over heels" (p. 128). "He is ugly and sad," she said to Fermina Daza, "but he is alllove." (p. 101) ~ իսպ. ՝ - Es feo y sade - le dijo a Fermina Daza -, pero es todo amor. (p. 177).
In this example, no literal translation has been made, but the phrase's chapter is used, which replaces the whole word, the latter being available in English and Spanish.
  The value of each translation is assessed by considering the skills used by the translator in such cases.
  From head to toe it corresponds to the purely Armenian language thinking, nevertheless it completely conveys the meaning of what is said in the original.
Before saying the bottom of the tongue, Dr. Urbino Daza made some lyrical remarks about old age.
  (page 310) ~ English: Before he came to theaging. (p. 248) պ իսպ.` One of the members of this fund, Dr. UrbinoDaza hizo algunas divagaciones sobre la vejez. (p. 414).
The translator again encountered the problem of translating stable expressions ել found the correct solution by using the equivalent phrase unit in Armenian versus the existing phrase in Spanish.
And so, the last resort used in mediated translation is adaptation.
  It is used in cases when it comes to the translation of a situation, which is available only to the people who speak the original language, and there is no such situation in the translated language.
"Sick women live forever."
  (page 232) լ English: "Sick women liveforever". (Sick women live forever) (p. 186) պ Spanish: Mujer enferma, mujereterna1. (Sick woman, eternal woman) (p. 313).
It is clear that in Latin America there was a belief that sick women live forever և as a result of linguistic thinking the saying appeared in the language.
 In Armenian և in English such a situation could be translated literally from the original: a sick woman, an eternal woman.
It is not appropriate to meet, therefore, when making a translation that it is not possible to replace it with a saying, but to make a translation that represents the situation.
Elena Hayrikyan G. Գ. THE TRANSLATORS USED IN MARQUEZ'S LOVE IN MOLECULAR'S NOVEL AND THEIR ROLE IN TRANSLATION Keywords: means of translation, substitution, transliteration, equivalence, translation, adaptation, translation
