PROBIOTIC PROPERTIES OF LACTIC LACTIC BACTERIA INTRODUCTION.
  Lactic acid bacteria (Lactobacilli) have been used in the economy since ancient times due to their ability to produce and preserve food.
CBDs are a diverse group of bacteria.
  They are widely distributed in nature, being an important part of the microflora of humans and animals.
  Compared to other microorganisms, CBTs play a predominant role as food preservatives, or other organisms have been found in many foods.
  From this point of view, KTBder is used especially in the process of processing and ripening of pickled vegetables.
 Such processing of vegetables is a widely used traditional method used by the Armenian people for centuries, which allows to preserve ելimprove the taste, structure և health properties of food made without food additives.
As it is known, vegetables, especially the cruciferous family, have healthy properties.
 Contains vitamin C, carotenoids, chlorophyll, flavonoids, dietary fiber, rich in minerals - K, Mg, Se, which have a protective effect against various diseases, such as cancer, obesity, diabetes - hypertension.
  KTB fermented vegetables may have higher functional activity than raw vegetables.
CBDs have increased their popularity as probiotics, which improve intestinal function due to their antibacterial activity.
  They produce a number of products of antibacterial metabolism, which include organic acids, various organic compounds, hydrogen peroxide և bacteriocins.
 Interest in CBDs has also increased due to their immunostimulatory, anti-allergenic and anti-tumor activity [2, 3].
CBDs are in great demand in food quality assurance, being indispensable food microbiologists, as they are not toxic to humans, do not change the properties of food, are effective in small quantities, are active in the refrigerator, are endowed with antibacterial activity [4, 5].
  Bacteriocin-producing TBs can also be used in our own fermented foods or added to fresh foods as a protective culture [6].
 Therefore, the preservation of the unique coexistence of Armenia has a national significance.
  For this reason, the study of the biological properties of the CBT, the explanation of the biotechnological potential are relevant, open new perspectives for obtaining different bio-preparations, to which this work is dedicated.
Materials և methods.
  The objects of the study were mesophilic, mainly spherical-rod-CB strains, which were isolated from the samples of pickled vegetables from small farms of different regions of Armenia (in number 28).
Pure CBT cultures were isolated from one of the colonies resulting from the sequential dilution of acid samples to MRH (Man, Ragoza, Chart), hydrolyzed milk, and 10% skimmed milk agar.
 All isolated strains were stored at 32 oC with 20% glycerol.
 If necessary, the strains were activated in 10% skim milk, 0.1% peptone, 0.1% yeast extract, pH 7.0 in food medium.
The antibacterial properties of the isolated pure cultures were determined by diffusion in the agar by drilling holes in the solid medium with a sterilized punch.
  KTBs were grown in 24 h milk, in MRSH.
 Representatives of different groups of microorganisms were used as a test organism: Escherichia coli VKPM-M17, Staphylococcus aureusWDCM-5233, Bacillus subtilis WT-A1, Candida guilliermondii.
  In order to obtain the nocturnal culture of the test organisms, the liquid nutrient medium for their growth was pre-infected with the test organisms with a needle and transferred to a greenhouse (37 ° C).
  The next day the night culture was added in 0.1 ml to a sterilized Petri dish և mixed with the melted և frozen agar at 45-50 ° C.
 Then, after making holes in the solid medium with a sterilized punch, 0.1 ml of KTB culture liquid was poured into them.
 Petri dishes were transferred to a heat exchanger (37 ° C) and the diameter of the absence zones was measured after 24 hours of cultivation at the optimum temperature for the development of test organisms.
Geological and cellular properties have been studied by microscopic methods (Olympus CH2, Germany).
 Among the morphological properties, the egg size of the vegetative cell was mentioned.
 The cell egg was found by simple staining of the preparations with methylene blue.
  One-day culture cell measurements were performed under a microscope using an ocular screw micrometer.
 Cell sizes were expressed in micrometers (μm).
According to Gram, the ability to dye was determined by the universal egg.
Physiological և biochemical properties. To determine the ability to grow at different temperatures, the cultures were grown in the appropriate liquid nutrient medium in the range of 5 to 80 ° C, the pH dependence was studied in the range of 5 to 10 at the appropriate optimum temperature.
 The resistance of CBT strains to different salinity densities was studied by sowing in a medium containing 0 to 5% NaCl.
  To detect catalase, 10% hydrogen peroxide was added to the culture fluid, and arginine was added to Nessler reactive to detect desaminase activity.
  The susceptibility of the strains to oxygen was studied by sowing in a semi-liquid medium.
 The food medium was covered with sterilized paraffin.
  The determination of the ability of bacteria to regenerate nitrates was made by adding Grace's reagent.
  The hydrolyzing properties of casein և starch have been studied by sowing in nutrient media containing the substrate [8, 9].
  In a gelatin-containing medium at 37 ° C, liquefaction of the substrate for 24 hours confirms gelatinase activity.
 All studied CBT strains were grown in milk containing 0.1% methylene blue և at the Hugh-Leifzon overnight site to demonstrate the ability to assimilate carbohydrates and produce carbon dioxide (homo և hetero-fermentative activity).
Results և discussion.
  Samples of cucumber, mixed vegetables, dandur, and nutmeg acids were collected from the villages of different regions of Armenia, from the capital of Georgia, Tbilisi, and from the village of Teryan (5 samples).
  The samples were collected in 2013. in September-October.
  Samples, as well as strains of 28 isolated mesophilic CBDs, are kept in the Department of Microbiology, Plant and Bacterial Biotechnology, YSU Faculty of Biology.
  To evaluate the biotechnological potential of the strains, their antibacterial activity was studied.
The antibacterial activity of isolated strains against a number of test organisms was tested.
  Antibacterial activity data are presented in Figures 1 և 2.
  It should be noted that not all studied strains suppressed the growth of gram-negative Escherichia coli VKPM-M17, endospores-producing gram-negative Bacillus subtilis WT-A1 և Candida guilliermondii.
  Only 16 of the isolated strains were able to suppress the growth of Staphylococcusaureus WDCM-5233, so the 6 most active ones were selected for further work.
  The morphological, functional, cultural and biochemical properties of the isolated strains were studied.
Figure 1. Antibacterial activity of CBS. Figure 2. Antibacterial activity of CBs against S. aureus WDCM 5233.
 All cocoons form short chains.
 The studied CBs form small (dotted), round, ovate, spiral, lenticular, rod-shaped, light-convex, white or yellowish, shiny or dull, with smooth or cut edges, not exceeding 2 mm in diameter.
Strain N 1.9 Strain N 2.V Figure 3. Micrographs of KTB strains (1000 ×) Strains differ in different concentrations of NaCl in the environment, in different solutions of carbohydrates and carbon sources, as well as the ability to grow in different temperatures և pH.
  The optimum growth of isolated strains is 37 ° C, but all studied strains have wide temperature limits of bioactivity.
  All strains grow at 30 ° C to 45 ° C, 5.1։ 1.9 strains at 20 ° C, and 1.9 strains at 55 ° C.
 No studied strains grew at temperatures of 4 ° C և 72 ° C.
  The studied strains increased in the pH range = 6-10, except for 5.7 strains.
 Strain 1.9 was able to grow even at pH 5.
 All strains grew in the presence of 0.5% NaCl, and strain 1.9 withstood even 4% NaCl.
All individuals are chemoorganotrophs, homofermentative, catalase-negative bacteria, do not produce gas in a glucose-containing environment, do not produce amylase-gelatinase.
 Only 1.9 և 2.IX strains were able to restore nitrate to nitrate (Fig. 4A).
 Determination of arginine-desaminase activity showed that all strains were capable of producing ammonia from arginine except strains 5.1 (Fig. 4B).
 FIGURE A Figure 4. Nitrate Recovery of Nitrite (A) և Arginine Deoxamine Capacities of Lactic Bacteria Figure 5. Recovery of 0.1% Methylene Blue Figure 6. 1.9 Lactic Assimilation of Lactic Bacteria in Carbohydrates Dehydrated, 0.1% Methylene Blue Contained -blue (Fig. 5).
Table 1 summarizes all the data obtained, describing the bacteria and reflecting their potential biological properties.
 These properties confirm the probiotic nature of the studied strains.
 The assimilation of different carbohydrates by the CBT is given in Table 2.
Lactic acid bacteria morphological, culture and kensakimiakanAghyusak 1.Bjji dzeveGram-nerkumChape (microns) hatkutyunnereShtami №Kokker, tsupiknerDimatskunutyun NaCl of pH optimumFiziologiaJermastichanayin optimumKensakimiaArginini dezaminatsumAche methyl nitrite kapuytumZhelatinazayin aktivutyunNitrate sole source of carbon recovery of acetic acid sodium salt, as well as ksiloze, dultsite, rafinoze, ramnoze, sorbite և The urine was poorly absorbed by the strains.
 It should be noted that strains 1.9 և 2.IX assimilated glycerin only after 7 days.
All studied strains were identified according to morphological, cultural, functional and biochemical characteristics են belong to the genera Lactococcus (2.IX), Enterococcus (5.1, 5.7), Leuconoctoc (2.V, 2.X) և Lactobacillus (1.9).
 For more precise identification, more complex studies involving the determination of lactic acid isomers are required, or molecular genetic identification is required.
Tartaric acid lactic acid bacteria carbohydrates yuratsumeAghyusak 2.AtskhajurSakharozFruktozArabinozMaltozLaktozRafinozRamnozTsellobiozGalaktozSorbitMannozMannitRibozDultsitGlitserinKitronattvayin Na Na Na oxalic NH3 KsilozMizanyutShtami acetic acid N - not atskhajure by KTB appropriated - KTB less appropriated by atskhajure ++ KTB partially appropriated by atskhajure +++ - KTB fully appropriated by atskhajure eAyspisov all strains can be proposed to be offered as fermented food cultures of fermented food, which have probiotic properties.
Literature 2. Bezkorovainy A., Probiotics.
 determinants of survival and growth in the gut. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.EJ Vandamme (ed.), Bacteriocins of lactic acid bacteria.
  microbiology, genetics and4. Lahtinen S., Ouwehand A., Salminen S., Von Wright A., Lactic acid bacteria.
 Molecular and Arshaluys Verdyan, Inga Bazukyan PROBIOTIC PROPERTIES OF LACTIC LACTIC BACTERIA Keywords: lactic acid bacteria, antibacterial activity, pickled vegetables.
