COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE MEANINGS OF ENGLISH AND ARMENIAN THINKING VERBS The connection between language և thinking has always been և remains at the center of linguists' study.
 In this respect, the comprehensive study of thought verbs is remarkable.
  Thought verbs form a certain mass in any language, so it is interesting to make a combined analysis of these verbs based on the material of two or more languages.
The presented article is dedicated to the comparative study of English և Armenian verbs.
 The main purpose of the article is to present different semantic classifications of thought verbs, to observe the similarities and differences of separate semantic subgroups, which will help to reveal cognitive similarities in the combined languages.
  The material of the analysis consists of 90 thought verbs in English and 90 thought verbs in Armenian.
In the lexical group of thought verbs in English we have singled out 11 semantic subgroups, in Armenian - 15.
  Moreover, it should be noted that there are 9 semantic subgroups in the combined languages. I. to bring / conclude.
 In English, this subgroup consists of only two things: 1. Deduce - to form an opinion about something based on the information or evidence that is available, և 2. Conclude - to decide or believesomething as a result of what you have heard or seen1.
In Armenian, this subgroup is quite extensive, represented by thirteen verbs, for example, to conclude, to conclude, to conclude Gyle.
II. To think, to think.
 There are forty-six verbs in English, for example, the ambiguous verb meditate, both meanings of which relate to mental activity: 1. to think deeply usually in silence, especially for religiousto consider doing something2.
The subgroup mentioned in Armenian consists of twenty-four verbs, for example, to think: 1. to think about something, to think a lot, և 2. to take care of something, to enjoy 3.
III. Judge / sleep.
 There are three verbs in English, such as the ambiguous verb reason, both of which refer to mental activity: 1. to2 In the same place.
3 Aghayan E., Explanatory Dictionary of Modern Armenian, Yerevan, 1976.
wer to think in a logical way, 2. to use your power to think and understand.
Eleven verbs are presented in this subgroup of the Armenian language, for example, the verb to consider is ambiguous: thinking to decide.
IV. To think, to form an opinion.
 In English, this subgroup consists of fourteen verbs, for example, the ambiguous verb speculate, which expresses the ability to think only in its first meaning: 1. to form an opinion aboutsomething without knowing all the details or facts.
In contrast to English, in Armenian this subgroup is small, consisting of seven verbs, for example, suppose, which expresses the meaning under study in the first two of the four common meanings, namely: 1. to assume, և 2. to think.
V. Repeat the operation.
  There are seven verbs in English, for example, reconsider, rethink - to think again about an idea, a course of action etc.especially in order to change it, and in Armenian, two, for example, reconsider (reconsider, reconsider, reconsider; recall) To remember, to remember) 1.
VI. Do the opposite.
  In English, this subgroup is represented by seven verbs, for example, disapprove - to think that somebody / something is not good or suitable to not approve of somebody / something2.
There are only three verbs in this semantic subgroup of Armenian, for example, mistake, which has six meanings.
 The meaning under study is expressed in the meanings of II, IV և VI: 2. to think incorrectly, to judge, 4. to be confused, to allow confusion և 6. to miss, not to notice.
VII. Think deeply.
 In English this subgroup is not extensive, it consists of two verbs, for example, ruminate - to think deeply about something, while in Armenian it is represented by four verbs, for example, to think deeply, to weigh deeply, etc.
VIII. Worry mentally.
 There are three verbs in English, for example, agonize - to, while in Armenian there are seven verbs, for example, the verb ambiguous to think, both of which refer to mental activity: 1. to confuse the mind, to torment, to torment; 2. To leave the mind, to leave, to leave with the mind and soul, to put in an abandoned state.
IX. Perform professionally directed mental action.
  In English, this group is represented by four verbs, for example, the ambiguous verb meditate, both of which mean thinking activity: 1. to think deeply, usually in silence, especially for religious reasons or indoing something3.
There are five verbs in this subgroup of Armenian, for example, the ambiguous logical verb, both meanings of which express the meaning we are studying 1 See Aghayan E.
2 See Hornby A.
3 In the same place.
1. to think logically, to judge, 2. to reason logically, to reason intelligently, to weigh.
The above can be presented in the form of a table. Meaning group Do not bring (conclude) Think / think Judge / examineConsider / formulate an opinionReverse actionRepeat / repeat the actionDo deep thinking տPerform professionally focused actionEnglish EnglishTable 1 English
In English they are: I. to consider (7 verbs), for example, consider - something in relation to the situation inwhich it happens or exists; entertain.
II. Assume (14 verbs), for example, imagine, which has three meanings. All three express the ability to think: 1. to form a picture intrue, 3. to think that something is probably true.
III. Think based on reliable information (3 verbs), for example, the ambiguous verb conclude, in which case the meaning we are studying is expressed in the first sense: to decide or believe something as a result ofwhat you have heard or seen.
IV. Think based on unreliable information (6 verbs), for example, stereotype-to form a fixed idea about a person or thing which may not really be true.
V. Think based on reliable / unreliable information (5 verbs), for example, conform ambiguous verb, the first meaning of which, to behave and think the same way as most other people in a group or society, refers to thinking activity.
VI. To think carefully (14 verbs), for example, consider which has four meanings. The ability to think is expressed only in its first meaning - toto think carefully about something.
VII. To have a definite, specific opinion (11 verbs), for example, mainstream, which comes in two senses, but the meaning under study is expressed only in the first sense - to make a particular idea or opinionaccepted by most people.
It is interesting that we have real subgroups in the above-mentioned semantic subgroups.
 For example, to think on the basis of reliable information, a subgroup is opposed to thinking on the basis of unreliable information, as to think on the basis of reliable / unreliable information, a subgroup is opposed to thinking on the basis of a particular subgroup.
In terms of meaning, the material of Armenian thought verbs is richer than English.
  In addition to the above, there are eight subgroups.
 They are: I. make abstract judgments.
  The only representative of this group is to think of the ambiguous verb, both meanings of which refer to intellectual activity: 1. to examine with the mind, to analyze the facts, phenomena in the mind, to examine և 2. to make thoughtful, abstract judgments 1.
II. Think for a long time (twelve verbs), for example, to think, to think, to immerse, to meditate, to think.
III. Think the same way (two verbs).
 They are: to agree և to agree, to agree, to agree.
IV. Think about it.
  Here we have ten verbs.
  For example, to be rude, to reason well.
It is interesting that in the last subgroup there are verbs that have both positive and negative meanings.
  Only three verbs have a positive meaning.
 For example, to reason, to understand, to comprehend.
There are seven verbs in a negative sense, for example, to become stupid, to become stupid, to lose ingenuity, to become incapable of understanding and thinking.
V. To invent, to create (eight verbs), for example, to create, to create mentally.
VI. To suffer mentally to do something (ten verbs), for example, to torment, to torment the mind, to cause heavy concern, anxiety.
VII. Mentally prepare to do something (five verbs), for example, to conceive an ambiguous verb, both meanings of which relate to mental activity: 1. to conceive, to conceive և 2. to conceive, to conceive, to intend.
VIII. To remember, to remember (five verbs), for example, to remember, to remember, to remember.
It is noteworthy that the most extensive in the combined languages ​​is the think / think subgroup, but in English it is represented by 46 verbs, while in Armenian there are only 24 verbs.
 As for the smallest semantic subgroups, in English it is only to judge / examine the semantic subgroup, consisting of 3 verbs, and in Armenian, to mentally prepare to "remember" the semantic subgroups consisting of five verbs.
It would be right to have English equivalents as well.
In semantic languages, semantic gaps are filled by the following main means: 1. verbally, for example, extrapolate - to indirectly solve, to drive - to recover one's senses, to become wise և etc .; through a descriptive translation provided by us based on the semantic analysis made in this article.
For example: editorialize - to indulge inthoughts.
1 See Aghayan E.
It is also interesting that while studying the semantic groups, 3 cases of homonymy were encountered in Armenian.
 This feature is missing in English.
For example: I) 1. to judge the verb, which in one case means to condemn, to punish, to judge, to think, to consider և, etc., and in the other case: 2. to work, to do something, to earn, to work to earn money.
It is also interesting to classify thought verbs according to "word-temporal orientation".
 Accordingly, let us separate two groups in the combined languages.
  The most extensive semantic subgroup in English is the literal subgroup "towards the future", which includes 25 verbs, for example, the ambiguous dream verb, which expresses the meaning under study in the second sense: 2. to imagine and think about something that you would like tohappen.
  Only two verbs have been singled out in the English's "towards the past" subgroup.
  These are: remember, reminisce - to think, talk or writeabout a happy time in your past.
  It would be right to have English equivalents as well.
In Armenian, on the contrary, the most extensive semantic subgroup is the subgroup "literally" directed to the past, which contains 22 verbs.
  For example, to recall an ambiguous verb, in both meanings of which the thinking capacity is expressed: 1. to recall, remember to reproduce և 2. to recall, to cite.
In Armenian, fourteen verbs have been singled out in the subgroup aimed at "towards the future".
  For example, to imagine a verb that has 5 meanings, ելու the ability to think is expressed in I և II meanings: 1. to imagine in the mind և 2. to form an idea, to consider, to think.
Table 2 EnglishArmenianSpiritual group of verbsThe number of verbs whose meaning is directed to the future idioms, the meaning of which is directed to the pastOpep Thus, as the analysis shows, English և Armenian thought verbs in the semantic field reveal a number of similarities, which indicate common The features reflect the peculiarities of the national mentality, which are connected with the history, culture, way of life of peoples, etc.
The reason for these differences is definitely very difficult to find out.
Linguistics such as history, psycholinguistics, ethnography, etc. should come to the aid of linguistics in this work, and only by joint efforts will it be possible to approach the exact solution of the question.
Veronika Galstyan COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF SENSE CLASSIFICATIONS IN ENGLISH AND ARMENIAN THOUGHT Keywords Keywords: language, thinking, semantic subgroups, commonality, difference.
