HAMO SAHYAN'S MEASUREMENT Hamo Sahyan's verse is characterized by grammatical features, subtle sound perception, unique rhyme, music, due to which it is possible to achieve harmony between the horse and the content.
  Being one of the main forms of sound repetitions, the rhyme occupies a special place in H. Sahyan's creative heritage, often acting not only in its direct sound role, but also assuming a structural, substantive, plot, stylistic role. they become clearer especially when we consider the role that line ending plays in verse compositions.
  H. Sahyan's rhetorical system makes the poetic word smooth, sound, contributes to the sensory perception of natural phenomena, creates a sound illusion, emphasizes this or that mood.
  "Almost all of your poems, which are typical of the Armenian verse, are reflected in Hamo Sahyan's work in a unique way."
The tone, rhythm, melody come from the genre features of the verse.
  The melodic, melodic poem is typical of Armenian thought from the Middle Ages to the present day.
  Embodied in folklore, the rhyme, like all other forms of rhyme, gradually penetrated the works of individual writers, becoming one of the inseparable elements of a moderate work3.
The tone is one of the main aspects of the sound formation of a verse.
 It makes the word more flexible, it is a unique means of artistic expression, it helps to strengthen the emotional influence, it creates a certain tone of expression.
 Rhyme is the phenomenon when two or more lines in a poem have such a (consonant) ending.
 For example: Stand like this all around me, a Order me to be stoned b And to be friends with all, all a Generations like you 4.
 b The most important role of the rhyme is that, appearing at the end of the lines, it emphasizes the line more, as if it were the main rhythmic unit of the poem itself 1 Ezekyan L., Stylistics Guide, Yerevan, 2007, p. 49.
2 Papoyan A., The linguistic art of verse, Yerevan, 1976, p. 22.
3 Hmmt. Abeghyan M., Confusion of the Armenian language, Yerevan, 1933, p. 412.
4 Sahyan H., Stone Liturgy, B, Yerevan, 2004, page 50 (hereinafter referred to as CP, will be mentioned in parentheses after the quote).
condition.
 The tone seems to be a signal that reminds us of the end of the line.
 With that, he intensifies the rhythm of the verse.
  Besides, the rhyme makes the poetic word more harmonious and musical.
When referring to other expressions at the phonetic level, it is necessary to pay special attention to the rhyme and its types.
The role of Hang in lyric poetry is generally huge, and H. The rhyme in Sahyan's lyric poetry has interesting and remarkable manifestations.
 He became captive to the rhyme, և the content never suffers because of the rhyme, but և did not reject the rhyming poem.
 H. Sahyan created a unique sound system.
I am not a servant. They are my servants.
 (n. t., 183) All types of external rhyme are found in H. In Sahyan's cases.
a) Adjacent rhyme (adjacent lines are connected with a rhyme) - aabb: I would leave, I would leave, I would forget, I would forget.
I would fall into the sea from the hand of my mind, From the springs և from the shores I fled like a river.
Bitter and unfathomable in my waters, I would lose my family and my name.
 (n. t., 14) Here, in addition to the adjacent rhyme, the 3rd և 6th lines are also rhyming.
b) Cross-rhyme (odd lines are connected by a rhyme, pairs are connected to each other) - abab: Everything was a dream, A mixed and disturbed dream.
I did not shed tears, You did not laugh at me.
 (n. t., 155) Swallows are thrown into the sky, The heavens break through the sky, They take a foot from the sky, They bring the baby in their mouths.
 (n. t., 159) A flood of flowers foams before the eyes of the forest.
He is looking for a missed ear. A dusty roar of Awakening.
 (n. t., 48) I was called, they took me again to the high performers of Syunyats, Thread-thread, rope-rope The paths of my childhood 1.
With pure tears of God My wounds were washed away, In vain my confessions confessed my sins.
 (n. t.) H. In Sahyan's works, the crucifixion prevails.
 53% of the studied poems are written in cross-rhyme (109 out of 206 poems).
c) Ring-rhyme (rhymes are connected to the first-fourth lines, and the middle lines to each other) - abba. What can I say, forest, to your ear, a That the winds do not blow from your breath dry, b That the creek does not pass through your heart b And never threatens your deposit.
 a (CP, 87) H. Sahyan also has uneasy deeds (white verse). None… Neither you nor the wind, Seven worlds divided us ն What the years brought, alas, the smell of torment, the smell of pain 2.
Not a single stain will stick to the pitch and bitterness of your treachery. Flight of the soul, heartbreak. Love trembling to Armenia.
 (n. t., 138) He has seen a lot of blood and pain, What will happen from now on - Look with a kind eye, God, on this handful of Armenia.
 (n. t., 139) The inner rhyme is endowed with great stylistic possibilities, which appear inside the same line or in the middle of the adjacent lines.
 H. Sahyan, according to the tax requirement, uses it quite often, combining the musical with emotion and feeling.
 The inner rhyme consists mainly of similar words and phrases.
  It is noticeable that they often give clarity to the structure of the poem, keeping it from being too complicated, in addition, they give interesting phonetic properties to the writing.
To this criminal world, to the Late world, to the poor and powerful world, what can I say to make him understand?
Lord and ownerless world, To this impatient world, To this indifferent worldWhat can I say so that he understands3.
1 Sahyan H., Do not miss me, Yerevan, p. 28.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Sahyan H., Collection of poems, vol. 1, Yerevan, 1975, page 143.
Since most of the words in Armenian have an final accent, the masculine rhyme predominates in our lyric poetry.
  There are much fewer feminine tenses in Armenian, in which the penultimate syllable of the line is emphasized.
 H. Sahyan especially uses female tones.
  The sound of the female rhyme is very different from the regular male rhymes for our language.
  In this way, it is easier to close the line or the half line inside and finish it.
You were my only one, like Armenia, you were the lamp of my house, you were the smoke in my house.
Yours was mine, mine was yours forever, You were my only one, like Armenia!
You were my empire, you were my country, you were the fullness and the fullness, you were the destiny, and you were my only one, like Armenia.
You were the price of my life, you were my Milky Way And you were my share, you were my goddess, You were mixed in my breath, in my essence ... You were my only one, like Armenia.
 (CP, 153) It is very common in his works when the female rhyme inside the speech acts as a stable and permanent inner rhyme, reinforcing the rhythmic meaning of the segment, and with its similarity to the conclusion creates the impression that the line is divided into symmetrical and equal halves. .
My life / was mixed and long,… .. a ..... b He was rebellious / every step,… .. b… .. a The enemy was evil, / the sky was stone,… .. a… .. b Far away , far away / the shine of the stars.
… .. b… .. a From the scheme of half-line և rhyme rhythms, the order of the minimum unit of measure - half-line, proportionate and harmonious arrangement is clear.
 In such cases, he sometimes seeks to enrich and enrich the consonant by deepening the number of similar sounds supporting the consonant words.
Such poems presuppose the coincidence of syntactic, tonal and dimensional sections, and this is done by the simultaneous division and formation of different components of the subconscious interjection.
Matching of sounds in tones can be complete or partial.
 When the sounds of the end of the line are repeated in the same line in another line, such a knot is called exact (tsegin-soul, bloody-squeezed, mountains-days).
  In approximate tones, next to such sounds, there are also large or small deviations or obviously different sounds (vowels ձայն consonants).
For example, child-ruthless, plunder-darkness, sorrow-in vain, death-for-now, beyond-countless, towards-faceless, ascend-scratch, fire-written, fleeing-sad, there-without և և etc.
  In the approximate rhyme, not the same, but similar, reminiscent sounds are repeated, or only a part of the rhyming sounds (peacemaker, front-dressed, hat-head, rose-read, unreal-friend).
 Approximate rhymes are called resonant rhymes.
 For example, You have taken "luck", "longing", And my life has passed from generation to generation, And instead of what you have taken from me, You have given worries and pains 1.
H. Sahyan's verse is dominated by accurate rhymes. In the distant valley of the homeland, stones flow from the sky.
 (n. t., 64) Everything is a real miracle, It is a real miracle in the gorge, Childhood flows from the trees - In the forms - a flower and a rainbow 2.
... And was it worth coming to the world?
A house, to keep a head, To gain a Temporary One immortality. It was worth it to suffer so many losses.
It was worth crushing so many rocks to get to a rocky bed, to repeat a simple and original One truth, to find a handful of identities. It was worth it to foam so much.
Was it worth it for you to thunder so much, And was it worth it for you to come into the world?
 (CP, 6) The first և last lines are rhyming in the poem և there are lines that are rhyming with the same word (number).
Everything was a dream, A mixed and disturbed dream.
I did not shed tears, You did not laugh at me.
 (CP, 157) In the poem "The Ox" H. Sahyan uses the corridor rhyme in such a way that each quadruple house rests on the same rhyme. A large family was hoping for him.
The following example is also noteworthy, in which the rhyme not only shapes, instrumentalizes the poem, not only becomes its tonal-structural component, but also becomes the main content of the poem. With worries, hopes and love 1 Sahyan H., The Song of the Caravans, Yerevan, 1968, p. .
2 Ibid., Poems, Yerevan, 1969, p. 179.
3 Ibid., Collection of poems, vol. 2, Yerevan, 1976, page 110.
Heavy, Ornibun Always secret, Gives up, Impatient, Burns, Burns Up… Keep the torches, Young My heart is still 1.
H. Sahyan constructs the poem by repeating similar words, expressions, similar structures of speech, with the same frequency of separate rhythmic units - halves, lines, houses.
H. The rhythms in Sahyan's verse are rich and strong with their overwhelming majority.
  In addition, the rhyme contributes to the sound instrumentation of the pictorial system of the poem in the most definite way.
In Sahyan's poetry, the musical feeling always precedes the pictorial thinking after the first rhythmic paragraph, the rhythm of the word is formed in the subconscious beforehand on the basis of that feeling.
  During equal flux, the minimum dimensional unit is formed, line or half line, then that equal dimensional bond is reinforced in sound stable places with an acoustic pitch (inner rhyme, ending), which և become factors regulating the dimensional flow of speech.
 Two opinions are worth mentioning for this last point. "The concept of rhyme should be attributed to all kinds of phonetic repetition, which performs an organizing function in the dimensional composition of the poem," writes V. Jirmunsky 2.
 That's what he thinks! Tomaszky. "... the rest is not an ornament of the" articulation "of the poem, but a moderating organizing factor.
 The tone creates not only the similarity of the sounds, which is part of it, but also divides the speech into strings surrounded by it ”3.
  The peculiarity of strengthening the dimensional divisions of the poem with a strong phonetic piano H. Sahyan makes it the main feature that shapes the general rhythm of speech.
H. Sahyan's word is formed by phonetic duplicates and falls into the process with the initial arrangement of those duplicates.
  As NK Ozerov put it, the rhyme is the poet's first assistant, it creates associations.
  For Sahyan, the rhythmic sense of the same tone of the tone is the basis of the image combinations, this is very important in his work.
1 Sahyan H., Collection of poems, vol. 1, page 396.
Skillfully applying different types of rhyme, H. Sahyan reaffirms his authorial personality, the originality of his style.
  The sounds, forming a rhyme, H. In Sahyan's works, they acquire stylistic, aesthetic, coloring value, contribute to the expressiveness of the emotion of the word, to the sound imagery.
By the way, P. The horse H. He considered Sahyan one of the most skilled and delicate masters of rhyme1.
In one of his last interviews, H. Sahyan testified about the role of the driving force in the poem, which first of all defines his creative world. "When you read a poem, the rhymes should not attract attention.
 Just like the propeller of an airplane does not sound during flight.
In a good poem, the melodies are like the propellers of an airplane rising. ”2
Hasmik Grigoryan HANGO SAHYAN'S MEASUREMENT Keywords: rhythmic unit, rhyme, external rhyme, inner rhyme, attachment, cross-rhyme, ring rhyme, female rhyme, approximate rhyme, exact rhyme, sound system instrumentation.
