BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF ENZYMES IN PRACTICAL MEDICINE Advances in natural science in recent decades have been linked to the elucidation of the physical and chemical foundations of biological processes.
  Without enzymes, the life of organisms would be impossible.
  According to modern notions, a living cell is a small laboratory where the synthesis and degradation of various substances take place.
 In these chemical "factories" all the work is done at body temperature, and the "machines" working there, which participate in the production and transformation of energy, are enzymes.
  They are endowed with a number of biological features, due to which they have become the basis of life.
 In the presence of a small amount of enzymes, the corresponding reaction rate may increase significantly.
 For example, iron is used as a catalyst to break down hydrogen peroxide into water։ molecular oxygen.
  However, in the same reaction, when iron is replaced by the corresponding enzyme, catalase, its speed increases more than 20 million times.
  In other words, if in the first case the decomposition of the substance could take place within two seconds, then one millionth of a second with the presence of the enzyme is enough for its complete decomposition.
 Were it not for the speed of chemical reactions, there would be no vital phenomena, life itself.
Enzymes are high molecular weight proteins և, unlike inorganic catalysts, are particularly intense at moderate temperatures.
  At high temperatures, the protein in the enzymes coagulates, losing their biological properties.
  However, there are also heat-resistant enzymes, such as muscle myosin, which is involved in the contraction process, which can withstand temperatures up to 100 ° C.
 At sub-zero temperatures, almost all enzymes stop working, but they do not break down.
Enzymes are usually colorless, but can be yellow, green, gray or red.
  Most of them are dissolved in aqueous or saline solutions.
 Interestingly, during evolution, only enzymes in the living cell produced anti-enzymes that inhibit the effect of that enzyme under appropriate conditions and prevent the breakdown of its own organ.
  The study of their catalytic activity is possible only in case of their disconnection and purification.
The science of enzymes has been widely used in practical medicine.
  This refers first of all to the diseases, the cause of which is the insufficient effect of this or that enzyme.
  Fabric disease is especially common in young men.
  In case of this disease, the nervous system and kidneys are affected.
 It turned out that in these patients the activity of the enzyme system ensuring the normal structure of the blood erythrocyte membrane is disturbed.
  In this case, the accumulation of fat is observed in the tissues, which is closely related to the activity of a special enzyme, cerex hexosidase.
 The activity of this enzyme in patients does not exceed one percent of the norm.
  Death occurs due to the accumulation of ceramide hexoside in the kidneys.
 It is an inherited disease related to the cell membrane due to the transfer of the corresponding gene.
Another disease of the nervous system, called Lesh-Nihanian, is associated with the exchange of another chemical compound in the cell, purine metabolism.
  In case of disease, the enzyme involved in the exchange of the mentioned substance is practically absent.
  Some diseases are associated with disorders of the metabolism of sulfur compounds in the body.
  For example, in the case of suppression of the activity of the enzyme sulfitoxidase, mental weakness and other signs of infection are observed.
 The content of sulfates in the urine of these patients is significantly reduced.
  Serious disorders of the metabolism of sulfur-containing compounds lead to premature death.
  A number of illnesses associated with mental retardation are caused by defects in carbohydrate metabolism.
 Among these diseases is Morkio-Ulrichht disease, which is also accompanied by weakness.
 The cause of this disease is a disorder of mucopolysaccharide metabolism in one of the carbohydrates.
Another condition associated with amino acid metabolism, called albinism, causes hair and skin discoloration.
 This is due to the lack of melanin in the hair dye.
  In this disease, the activity of the enzyme involved in the further conversion of the amino acids tyrosine և dioxyphenylalanin decreases.
  In healthy people, melanin is produced by post-transformation, but in albinos it does not form.
Albinism is an inherited disease.
  Another amino acid, cystine metabolism disorder, is associated with cystinol disease.
 This disease is also hereditary, but it is rare.
 Hardly soluble cystine during infection, without undergoing further conversion, accumulates in tissues and organs.
 In case of acute cystinulus, children die at the age of 2-3.
 Children suffering from this disease show signs typical of severe osteoporosis.
Let us now turn to some of the diseases that arise due to metabolic disorders in the liver.
 One of these diseases is called fructosuria, in which case fructose is poorly assimilated by the body and comes out with us.
  In the case of acute fructosuria eggs, the development of the organism stops, when mental weakness occurs.
  Another metabolic disorder in the liver is associated with the breakdown of glycogen synthesis.
  There is a disease in which glycogen accumulates more than normal in the liver.
  As a result, the tissue grows, the sugar content in the blood drops, and the baby stops growing.
 This is due to the fact that although glucose accumulates in the liver cells, glucogen is not broken down due to the insufficiency of the corresponding enzyme.
  This condition, called Girke's disease, is characterized by a significant increase in the amount of cholesterol in the blood.
 As the fat breaks down, so does the amount of acetone in the urine.
  Patients are treated with small amounts of carbohydrates, which helps maintain the necessary level of glucose in the blood.
  The study of the enzymatic composition of the blood is now important for the diagnosis of some diseases.
 More than 50 different enzymes (phosphatase, amylase, etc.) are known in the blood serum, the amount of which is relatively stable in a healthy organism.
  Determination of amylase activity in serum is used for diagnostic purposes in diseases of the pancreas.
The considerable value of enzymatic diagnostic methods is beyond doubt in practical medicine.
 It is safe to say that we are at the root of one of the most promising areas of biochemistry, clinical enzymology.
LiteratureMary AsatryanBIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF ENZYMES IN PRACTICAL MEDICINE Keywords: enzymes, proteins, disease, medicine.
