COMPETITION AND COOPERATION AS KEY ELEMENTS OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS The essence of the concept.
  The presented article discusses the competitive-cooperative concept of foreign policy.
  Within the framework of this concept, the policies pursued by the states և other actors in international relations (hereinafter referred to as the actors) are modeled through a common evaluation criterion - the competitive-cooperative system.
We try to combine the basic theories of international relations - realism - liberalism, based on their commonalities, - to develop a common system for evaluating the policies pursued by the actors.
  Competition and cooperation, in our opinion, are the essence of international relations, on which the concept of competition-cooperation is based.
Theories of international relations have two main functions: 1. To describe the relations of international relations, their regularities and peculiarities at the theoretical level, 2. To give effective tactics for conducting foreign policy in practice և Guiding principles.
 There are significant differences between the two theories on both the nature of international relations and the principles of effective policy.
  However, this does not mean that realism and liberalism completely exclude each other.
Thus, classical realism proceeds from the chaotic nature of international relations, which has been, is, will always be chaotic, and formulates the most realistic model for the protection of their interests by states in such conditions1.
 At the same time, liberalism does not deny the chaotic nature of international relations, but also raises the possibility of establishing a certain hierarchy as a result of the development of international structures in international relations in the future2.
  Both realistic and liberal approaches are reflected in international relations; the more they are opposed, the more they complement each other.
In practice, both theories apply, but realistic research simply teaches actors to compete effectively in their external relations. 1 See Morgentau H., Thompson K., Politics among nations, brief edition, NY, 1993.
2 Nye J., Keohane R., Transnational Relations and World Politics.
  An Introduction. International Organization, 25, to cooperate effectively with other actors, and liberalism.
  Moreover, the two theories also include elements of opposite skills, such as the power of alliances in realism and the power of free economic competition in liberalism.
Both skills, competition and cooperation, have always been necessary in the relations between the actors of international relations.
  The importance of competition and cooperation in international relations is the basis on which it is possible to formulate a universal concept based on the following principles.1. Each actor in international relations has certain interests և pursues certain goals.
2. In order to protect those interests, հաս to achieve the goals, each actor develops its own policy, which usually includes several possible development options; then implements one of the policy options.
3. Depending on the nature of the policy pursued by one actor in relation to the other actor (s) within the framework of a specific policy, the policy can be assessed as competitive or cooperative.
4. Competitive and cooperative orientations of politics, in turn, consist of specific policy options, which are also correlated.
  That is, one version of the policy can be more competitive than the other, both have a competitive orientation.
5. In order to achieve their goals, actors are constantly faced with a wide choice of policy options, from extreme competition (eg conflict) to extreme cooperation (eg integration).
 At the same time, the very unrealistic versions of the policy, through which the probability of achieving the set goal is very small, are initially ruled out by the actors.
6. The choice of this or that option largely depends on the time factor. Each policy option should lead to the achievement of the set goals after a certain period of time.
  Accordingly, the actors, as a rule, are more inclined to choose the option that requires less time.
7. Ideas about the future are also influenced by the trajectory of the actor's previous policy. The longer the history of the cooperation policy in the past, the greater the probability that the actor will go to the cooperation again.
 And vice versa, the more extreme the competitive manifestations in the actor's policy, the greater the possibility of its repetition.
Thus, the development of foreign policy by the actors can be considered as a two-stage action - determination of realistic policy boundaries - choice of one of these options.
One can see similarities between this process of policy selection հաս the key concepts in the negotiations, the potential agreement zone լավագույն the best alternative to the negotiated agreement և 1.
 Thus, these concepts help states to negotiate successfully, and in general, when assessing the realism of the options in foreign policy development, they try to identify the potential agreement area with the same principles, if they find a policy of cooperation, or try to find the best alternative if they refuse to cooperate. ակցության enter the competition.
Modeling the competition-cooperation system.
 Based on this evaluation system, the foreign policy of the actors can be modeled through a two-dimensional policy scale.
The vertical measurement of the two-dimensional scale is time (0 is the present, the negative is the past, and the positive is the future), and the horizontal measurement is the competitive-cooperative directions of politics (0 is the neutral policy, the positive is the cooperative and the negative is the negative). competitive).
If the policy pursued in the past is an objective reality, it can be clearly depicted, then the developed but not yet implemented policy may include a number of possible options, which will be marked as a range on the scale, respectively.
  The options of the policy that the actor considers unrealistic are left out of the range դեպի to the left և he is not going to implement.
The system may include մեկ one measure, which shows how long it will take for the various policies to be pursued by the actor to achieve the goals.
 The measurement will consist of a line connecting the points.
  If competitive issues require a shorter time to solve problems, the interest measurement will look like a line running from the bottom left to the top right corner, and if the partnership promises results in the near future, the line will point from the right to the top left corner.
This modeling system represents the fixation of subjective ideas about the policy to be followed by the leadership of the state or other actor in international relations.
Examples from the history of peacekeeping operations.
  We will try to present the presented modeling method with some examples taken from the history of UN peacekeeping operations.
 We are of the opinion that UN agencies should carry out similar modeling throughout the elaboration of the mandate of peacekeeping missions, during the deployment of missions, in order to identify negative developments early, to use the additional opportunities for peace building.
 It is relatively easy for peacekeepers stationed in conflict countries to find out what the actor's perceptions of their interests and goals are, what their capabilities are, and how long it takes them to accomplish this or that goal.
1 See Fisher R., Ury W., Getting to yes.
 negotiating agreement without giving in, London, 2011, pp. 62-81, 99-109.
According to statistics, only in 1945-1993. About half of the peace treaties signed failed no later than five years after they were signed1.
 Therefore, it is not accidental that peacekeeping missions often face the problem of violating the concluded agreements.
 After some positive developments, the opposite process takes place: tension of the situation և resumption of the conflict2.
  The parties to the conflict are reluctant to undermine the agreements reached due to a lack of sufficient mutual trust or simply to seek new benefits3.
Below we present the general modeling of conflicts involving peacekeeping missions. 1 Ankersen Ch., Civil-Military cooperation in post-conflict operations.
 Emerging theory & practice, NY, 2008, p. 53.2 See David Ch.-Ph., Does Peacebuilding Build Peace Liberal (Mis) steps in the Peace Process, 30 Security Dialogue25 (1999), pp. 29-31.
For example: Angola (UNAVEM II), Somalia (UNOSOM II), Rwanda (UNAMIR), Balkans (UNPROFOR), Liberia (UNOMIL), Cambodia (UNTAC), Haiti (UNMIH), Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).
The peculiarity of the picture is that first of all there is the history leading to deep competition, ն the curve of realization of interests has a rather large inclination towards the competition.
  That is why possible policy options will also include more competitive than cooperative options.
  This is the policy model of most of the actors in the post-conflict period, so the number one task of the UN is to find out how much this or that actor considers his opportunity to pursue a competitive policy.
  For example, in 1994 The Rwandan genocide was not the first time the Hutus carried out a massacre of Tutsis. The genocide itself was very similar to 1963. to the massacres of the Tutsis 1.
 This should have been taken into account during the UNAMIR peacekeeping mission in the United Nations, and "effective steps in advance (increase of the mission staff, etc.)" should have been taken to make the genocide an unrealistic step.
If the international community is behind, then the parties to the conflict, in their turn, are following the history of peacekeeping operations, trying to imagine what the limits of peacekeeping operations are.
  Unfortunately, any failure of the UN convinces the participants in other conflicts that in their case, too, the activities of peacekeepers can be thwarted.
Neither the UN nor the parties to the conflict should hope that the peace settlement program can be implemented through cooperation between the parties.
In order to avoid such self-deception, it is necessary to clearly assess or model the policy to be followed by the actors.
If peacekeeping missions are deployed to consider one of the parties' unwelcome peace plans, then the peacekeeping staff։ resources should be commensurate with the political pressure exerted on the parties to the conflict so that the dissident can maintain the cooperation expressed in the negotiations during the peace process.
 For example, the local peace plan in Sierra Leone in 2000 is on the verge of collapse. only 6 thousand were located here. peacekeepers, who become an immediate target of a rebel group, RUF2.
  2000 In May, UNAMSIL was in a state of crisis as hundreds of peacekeepers were abducted by insurgents.
  However, in this case the situation is corrected due to the intervention of the troops sent by the United Kingdom.
  As a result, the peacekeepers are released, UNOMSIL implements the disarmament program, supports the holding of the parliamentary presidential elections, և the conflict is, in fact, settled4.
In some cases, the policy of cooperation of one of the parties to the conflict is seen as a sign that the other does not have enough forces to continue the struggle.
  This mostly refers to the backward groups that would lose if the conflict continued. 3 UN, UNAMSIL background, see http.
//www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/missions/past/unamsil/background.html.
4 In the same place.
(for example, in Guatemala, MINUGUA).
  In addition to preventing the resumption of the conflict, in this case, work must be done to deepen and integrate cooperation between the government and the "rebels".
Finally, peacekeeping missions should be seen as temporary means of maintaining peace.
 Withdrawal of peacekeepers to some extent increases the parties' competition policy.
  In this case, it is necessary to first calculate whether the withdrawal of peacekeepers can lead to the resumption of the conflict.
  There are many cases when the UN has withdrawn its peacekeeping mission և had to return to that country for several years, for example, East Timor (UNMISET, UNUNIT), Liberia (UNOMIL, UNMIL), Congo (ONUC, MONUC), Haiti ( MIPONUH, MINUSTAH).
In our opinion, the competitive-cooperative model is applicable to any sphere of foreign policy; if there is sufficient information, it can provide a fairly accurate forecast.
 We have given examples of UN peacekeeping operations, but the system can be no less useful for the parties to the conflict, so that the latter do not have unrealistic expectations from peacekeeping programs in cases where they are not strengthened by the actual force of peacekeepers and the opposite side tends to competition policy.
The system can also serve as a basis for grouping theories of international relations, depending on the orientation of the theories, and can also be taught as a theory of competing skills, cooperating skills correctly.
Makar Melikyan COMPETITION AND COOPERATION AS KEY ELEMENTS OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS Keywords: Theory of International Relations, Competitive-Collaborative Concept, Conflict Studies, Peacekeeping Operations.
