LATEST BORROWINGS AND DICTIONARIES Borrowing is one of the main means of enriching the word structure of the language.
"The transition of this or that linguistic element, mainly a word, from one language to another through the contact and interaction of those languages ​​(it is done to express new concepts, meanings or differences of existing ones)" 1.
Copying is a method of borrowing, which was typical of the Armenian literary language.
 The loan is made in two ways: internally և externally.
The external borrowings that have passed from one language to another are internal to those that passed from the previous stage of one language to the next (from Grabar to Harts), from Armenian to Armenian (strategic), to colloquial (murmur), dialects (skate, peanut, ski, etel, etc.).
The process of borrowing is considered in linguistics with different internal manifestations.
 Depending on the mode of transition, there are: a) direct, b) mediation, c) oral, d) book, e) literary, f) double or etymological duplicates.
The Armenian language has borrowed to one degree or another in different stages of its development.
Speaking about the reasons for borrowing, M. Abeghyan singles out external factors especially when "there are ideas that do not correspond to the words in the national language, such as ideas from abroad, new cultural figures, new arts, products, etc., there are relevant words and connections, but the speaker thinks that they do not express any foreign language. ”2
Later, referring to the loans, linguist A. Sukiasyan singles out the following reasons for borrowing foreign words. aspiration (neighbor-neighbor), d) Getting a synonymous use of a foreign word in a borrowed language (compromise-agreement), 1 Petrosyan H., Dictionary of Armenian Studies, Yerevan, 1987, p. 613.
2 Abeghyan M., Theory of the Armenian language, Yerevan, 1965, page 49.
e) Avoiding term multiplicity (compressor -1. pressure, 2. clamp, clamp)
In terms of time, it is customary to divide the borrowed layer of our vocabulary into ancient, new and modern regions.
The borrowings that modern Armenian made from the period of its formation to the Soviet period are new.
 They relate to the world period, when Armenian borrowed mainly from Italian, modern Greek, French, English, German.
The newest completely covers the Soviet period.
 The borrowings of this period are mostly related to the Russian language, in particular to those made through his mediation, when thousands of words were borrowed and copied2.
It should be noted that M. Abeghyan singled out semantic borrowing as a type of borrowing, when the meaning of a word in a language expands or changes under the influence of the meaning of a foreign word.
  The author mentions that this phenomenon is often consciously used in the term systems of science and arts. "Instead of accepting a foreign word, their corresponding meanings are given to the native words, նոր or new words are formed by the example of words from other languages" 3.
Thus, we can prove that M. Abeghyan accepts the reality that we call today in the copy of the word և meaning.
Borrowing is conditioned by changes in political life, economy, culture, as well as in the social orientation of the society.
Linguist A. Martirosyan, studying the latest loans, notes that from a quantitative point of view, foreign loans and copies are more prevalent, mostly through Russian mediation4.
  For example, action-organized action, animation-animation, business forum-business forum, businessman-businessman, genophobia-racism, globalization-globalization, department-ministry or other department of the government (department) (<Russian: департамент, < French: de'partement), Internet, image, legitimacy, lobbying - system of agents of monopolies and offices under the legislature, which puts pressure on lawmakers and officials (< lobby foyer), film biennial-festival, coalition-federal, hacker-computer hacker, hit-song, melody <<English hit hit), manager-manager, management-management, marketing-marketing, mentality-murderer, or (<Russian.kamikaze), show business-television, cinema, theater և etc. (English: show business), paparazzi-journalist (it), often photojournalist, who obtains his information through espionage, populism-mob rule, 1 Sukiasyan A., Modern Armenian Language, Yerevan, 1999, pp. 187-188.
2 See ibid., Pp. 193-194.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Martirosyan A., The word-formation templates of modern Armenian modernities, Yerevan, 2007, p. 136.
producer-publisher, in the fashion of retro-style art, who prefers the eunuch, the unique, the only (<English singl <adj <singl), virtual-non-earthly, unreal, seemingly oligarchic-economic, politically dominant person, Ombudsman-Human Rights Defender (human rights activist), false start-false start, etc.
The semantic changes in the borrowing function are sometimes closely related to the structural-grammatical features of the word.
A. Martirosyan also refers to the meaning change of borrowed words.
  "Often the meaning change of borrowed words is conditioned by the fact that the meaning (s) of the borrowed word is rooted in the borrowed language.
  Thus, in the borrowed language, such meaningful words as business- 1. occupation, work, profession 2. commercial enterprise - firm, 3. profitable transaction, of which the first meaning is used in Armenian, or Sport- 1. fun, joke, have become narrower in meaning. , 2. a fan, 3. a man in a frenzy, a man in a frock coat, the first of which, with some semantic refinement, is the first to be used ”1.
There are different lexical and semantic types of copying.
Vocabulary (word copies), when translating foreign words into phrases: Armenian: superkhanut, <Russian: Супермагазин, English: <supermarket.
Semantic, when the metaphorical meaning of the word is borrowed: Armenian - structure, department, system, Russian - from structure, in the phonetic copy, when the literal translation of the phrasal expression is done: Armenian. blindly obeyed <Russian. Blind guilt super. <blinder Gehorsam և half-copies, when only a part of the word is translated into Armenian. macroeconomics <Macroeconomics.
The abundance of copies in a given language is usually due to a sharp increase in direct borrowing, as a result of the immediate reaction of the speakers.
 In the modern Armenian language, duplicate templates are mostly borrowed from Russian.
The idea of ​​copying as a word-formation method was given by M. Abeghyan. "Usually words և conjunctions are taken from other languages ​​և not separate parts of a fish.
 But when words with the same suffix enter from a language, the stems of which are used alone, those words are no longer separated from the native words, then their derivative parts become active, put together with other words, they form new words ”2.
Gives a remarkable interpretation of the word-formation method of copyingEd. Aghayan. «…. In the case of copying, the meaning of the word and the internal form are taken, and in other words, in the case of copying, the foreign word is simply translated by the words or components of the borrowing language ”3.
According to A. According to Martirosyan, the copied templates are: 1 Martirosyan A., page 133.
2 Abeghyan M., page 49.
3 Aghayan E., Vocabulary, Armenian language, part 1, Yerevan, 1980, p. 176.
1. Derivative copy templates. A) prefix b) suffix 2. Intricate copy templates 3. Half copies.
1. Derivative copy templates predominate in derivative copy templates.
 In the templates of copied derivative neologisms, the prefixes super- <сверх, super, ներ- <внутри-, himself- <anti-, контр-, back- <post-, after-, change- <vice-, then- < , which are composed of both simple and compound bases.
Prefix templates.
 Vocabulary activity is a foreign prefix, which is mostly composed of noun bases.
For example: super target, superstar, super weapon, super spy, superman, etc.
Newly formed templates are more common.
Such forms are: prefix + suffix word, prefix + compound suffix word, prefix + compound word.
Prefix + suffix word is more common in neuter formations: super-, hack (a) -, back-, ner-, then-, vice-prefixes.
 For example: superpower, superpower, super profit, hack (a) - counter-argument, anti-alarm, anti-radical, anti-presidential, anti-propaganda, post-Soviet, postgraduate, post-holiday, post-warranty, post-privatization, intra-alliance, intra-political, internal political, internal , vice-speaker, vice-president.
Prefix + compound derivative word: hak (a) - anti-advertisement, then-apasgach, vice-deputy prime minister.
Finished templates.
 Copy suffix templates are less common.
 In new formations, the suffix -met (pro-) is a word-formation activity, the words created by which belong mostly to the political term system.
  For example, pro-president, pro-government, pro-government, pro-Western, pro-center, etc.
In the duplicate derivative formations, the TVs with the prefix (a) - (<tele-, <tele) are quite active.
 The latter has become so stable in its composition that it pretends to become a prefix, although in the composition it has not yet lost its verbal expression.
 For example: TV commercials, TV games, TV frequencies, TV patents, TV debates, TV productions, TV companies, TV essays, TV catalogs, TV lotteries, etc.
2. Intricate copy templates.
  Copy և In semi-copy complexes, the relationships associated with the class ratio of components are more common.
  For example: civil law, political law, state law, psychosocial law, judicial law, bioeconomics, Afrasian philologist etc.
In the copied complex new formations, the ether- <Efir, video- <video protagonists perform an active word-forming function.
  For example: airtime, airtime, airtime, video channel, video city, video game, videotape, video, video link, video clip, videotape, video library, etc.
In the copied complications, there are fragmented formations.
  For example, on a European (European) basis: European Union, Council of Europe, European Court, MEP.
3. Semi-copied templates.
  Components of class composition are often found in the templates of semi-duplicate novelties.
  For example, show program, exhibition-sale, car-cottage.
  Applicable: eco-, energy (a) -, micro-, macro-, mono-, avia-international terminals.
  For example: ecosystem, energy system, energy carrier, energy supplier, macroeconomics, macroeconomics, macro world, micro-game, air ticket, plane crash, air cargo transportation.
 Foreign component + Armenian combinations such as mortgage, newmetal <from New metal ("New metal" music direction), lobbying, internet, pro-American, legitimacy, brokerage, pro-Chechen և etc.
 Armenian language + foreign component: super-problem, super-concern, supermodel, anti-populist, anti-depressant.
In semi-duplicated formations, the active components are the film, auto and primary components.
  For example: filmmaker, filmmaker, film week, film school, film market, film company, film debate, car alarm, car world, car accident, car waste, car show.
Hermine Karapetyan LATEST LOANS AND DICTIONARIES Keywords: borrowing, copying, novelty, vocabulary, term, word formation.
