LEGAL FICTIONS. THEORETICAL AND LEGISLATIVE ISSUES Legal fiction originated with the exercise of law and was used at all stages of its development.
  Despite its usefulness, a common definition of fiction has not yet been given in theory.
 Legal fiction has been questioned for some time, and some attempts have been made to criticize it.
 We think the reason is the inadequate perception of the negative meaning of that story.
  The problem is that the Latin translation of "fiction" means fiction, non-existent, unreal, uncertain, so at first glance it is difficult to imagine its existence in law in general.
  The question of what fiction is - whether it is necessary for law - has arisen among many scholars studying law.
  In terms of ensuring the effective regulation of public relations, the role of fiction is really big, Տ T. is right. Kashanina that fictions have exclusively legal purposes, the most important of which is the pursuit of order and efficiency 1.
 After studying the various legal definitions, we can describe legal fiction as a legal trick, a legislative technique that fixes the existence of a fact, regardless of whether it is real.
Legal fiction is a means of legislative technique used in legislative activities to regulate problematic public relations.
 The use of fiction is connected with the fact that sometimes in practice such difficult situations are encountered, when it is impossible to confirm their absolute reliability.
 The point is that in some cases justice և common interest requires well-known legal regulations, which are not contained in the current legislation, as a result, it is necessary to include this factual composition in the legal norm in the presence of well-known assumptions.
Fiction is used in law as a means of overcoming uncertain situations, legal economy, as a means of extending the legal regime from one object to another.
 When we say legal economy, we mean the following: it is much easier to give a conditional legal regime to an object that is not typical of it, than to create complex legal structures, as a result of which the legal regulation will be more comprehensive2.
  Fiction is a means of legal regulation, by the use of which the legislator objectifies legal regulation to such features, which the latter is not endowed with.
1 See Kashanina T., Юридическая текника, Москва, 2011, p. 82.
2 See Юрьевич М., Юридическая фикция в Contemporary Russian Legislator, Dis. канд. юрид.наук, Ставрополь, 2004, էջ 14.
Some authors have expressed the opinion that the use of fiction in the law can cause controversy, as it violates the principle of legal certainty.
  We do not share the opinion of those authors.
  The fact that the inheritance is not considered a deviation from the principle of legal certainty was also registered by the RA Constitutional Court by the decision SDO-603, referring to the constitutionality of Part 1 of Article 6 of the RA Law on Registration of State Rights to Property. The fiction of a legal entity that has come down to us from the depths of the centuries (Chapter 5) was fixed in
The Code regulates the number of relations regulated by the use of fiction, for example, the issue of recognition of the right of ownership over the property acquired by the spouses during the marriage (Article 201).
Although the application of fiction was mostly typical of private law, public law did not refrain from the application of the institute of fiction.
The protection of the interests of individuals from the arbitrariness of state bodies has been a necessity in all periods of human development, և states have always sought effective means to implement that protection.
  One such measure is the institute of jurisdiction, which provides an additional guarantee in the field of public law to achieve effective protection of the rights of individuals, to perform the duties of administrative bodies in the manner prescribed by law, especially within the time limit.
  The study of the legal acts regulating the public relations of different states shows that the procedural norms are regulated in particular detail.
  They define the actions to be taken during the decision-making process, the specific deadlines for their implementation, the legal consequences of not observing those deadlines.
Thus, by setting a specific deadline for making decisions: 1 the legislators of Italy, 2 of Spain, 3 of Greece, 3 of the legislators of Germany, the legislation on administrative proceedings envisages the legal consequences that occur when violating that deadline4.
  The legal consequence for not making decisions by the administrative bodies within the terms defined by law, that is, for the administrative bodies to show inaction, was provided by the fiction.
 In the laws of the enumerated countries, the silence of the competent body using fiction was equated with the satisfaction of the application.
 The following fiction is fixed in part 1 of Article 48 of the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administration և Administrative Proceedings". "As a result of the administrative proceedings initiated on the basis of the application, in case the administrative body authorized to adopt an administrative act does not adopt the administrative act within the period defined by law, the administrative act is considered adopted. The applicant may start exercising the relevant right."
By virtue of fiction, the legislator has established guarantees for the realization of a person's rights.
 To receive a proper response within a reasonable time to submit applications to public bodies for the protection of both personal and public interests 1 See http.
//www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/text.jsp?file_id=268850.
2 See http.
//unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/unpan/unpan034328.pdf.
3 See www.dejure.org/gesetze/BVwVfG.
4 See http.
//www.iuscomp.org/gla/statutes/VwVfG.htm.
The right to self-determination can be classified as one of the most important human rights, which is also enshrined in Article 27.1 of the RA Constitution.
  The state is responsible not only for judicial but also for non-compliance with reasonable time guarantees by administrative bodies1.
  Therefore, the inaction of the administrative bodies leads to the adoption of an administrative act by force of fiction.
An administrative act adopted by force of fiction is considered to exist, it cannot be legally refuted, although that act does not actually exist.
We do not rule out that the rights granted to persons by an administrative act existing by force of fiction may be illegal, in particular, contradict the requirements of legal acts regulating specific relations, violate the rights and legitimate interests of others, but this can not be grounds to deny the existence of fiction. is.
Even accepting the fact that fiction is dangerous is not a reason to deny its existence.
  As a result of considering the danger of fiction, the RA Court of Cassation established such conditions for considering the administrative act adopted by the force of fiction, which are not provided by law.
 However, we think that this "danger" should not be a reason to deny the fiction, and to condition the existence of the fact through it with the presumption of legality.
 Fiction can be crucial for administrative bodies to act quickly to perform their duties properly.
Ensuring a favorable situation for a person by using fiction in public law is a really reliable way to protect the rights of individuals from the arbitrariness of administrative bodies, especially from inaction.
  And in order not to give rise to various interpretations of Article 48 of the RA Law on "Fundamentals of Administration ՀՀ Administrative Proceedings", to ensure the application of the law in practice.
  Clear criteria may be set by the legislature, such as the interest of the person initiating the proceedings, the obligation to relate to his or her rights, to show the consequences of the expected administrative act, and so on.
We think that from the point of view of effective implementation and protection of constitutional human rights, certain fiction-norms can be established by the RA legislation.
  For example, according to Article 29, Part 1 of the RA Constitution, everyone has the right to hold peaceful assemblies without weapons.
  According to Article 20 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, "Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association" 2.
 Pursuant to Article 9 of the RA Law on Freedom of Assembly, in order to hold a public assembly (hereinafter referred to as an assembly), the organizer shall notify the authorized body in writing, except for urgent spontaneous assemblies with up to 100 participants3.
  The same law provides for the procedure of consideration of the notification by the competent body, as well as the procedure for making a decision on it, but it is not directly mentioned what consequences the inaction and silence of the authorized body will cause.
1 See "Comments on the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia", edited by G. Harutyunyan, A. Vagharshyan, Yerevan, 2010, p. 316.
2 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted on 10.12.1948.
3 RA Law on Freedom of Assembly, adopted on 14.04.2011.
The analysis of the well-known principles of international law on the right to peaceful assembly, such as the European Court of Human Rights, provides an opportunity to single out the following principles: Legislative regulation of the right to peaceful assembly should not restrict that right, and regulation should not include a system of permitting the exercise of that right.
 Gathering may be prohibited only on the grounds provided by the Constitution.
 According to our legislation, preference is given to the institute of awareness: if a decision on banning the assembly is not made as a result of the awareness discussion, then the holding of the rally should be considered lawful 1.
 We think that the following fiction should be clearly defined by law: if the competent body does not make a decision on banning the assembly, holding or allowing the assembly with the restrictions set by it, then the permission to hold the assembly is considered provided.
Litigation is more common in civil litigation.
  This is due to the need to regulate civil justice in more detail and, in some cases, to abandon the objective reality.
  Procedural fictions are considered a deviation from the general procedural rules,, without them it is impossible to conduct a comprehensive and objective investigation of the case.
 Thus, according to Article 80 of the RA Civil Procedure Code. "Persons participating in the case are obliged to inform the court or other persons participating in the case about changing their address during the proceedings.
 In the absence of such a report, the court documents shall be sent to their last known address, they shall be deemed to have been delivered, even if the addressee no longer resides or is not at that address.
As a result of the analysis of the mentioned provisions, the Court of Cassation found that the essence of the principle of exercising civil litigation on the basis of equality of the parties is that at all stages of the trial the parties have equal opportunities to use their rights - protection of legal interests.
  This principle shall be established by notifying the court of the change of address of the other persons participating in the case by the person participating in the case.
  In this way, not only the right of the person who changed the address is protected, but also the rights of other participants in the trial, as the court, by sending notices to the changed address, essentially ensures a reasonable examination of the case and the opportunity of the trial participants to attend the court session.
 This is due to the fact that the legislator leaves the risk of suffering the consequences to the party who conscientiously uses his procedural rights, that is, in the absence of a notification on the change of address, the notification is considered delivered regardless of the addressee living or staying at that address3.
 The role of this fiction is quite big in civil litigation.
 It implements not only unilateral competition և equality, but also a case within a reasonable time. Hungary ”decisions.
2 Adopted on 17.06.1998, entered into force on 01.01.1999.
3 See Case No. EED / 1730/02/11 of the Court of Cassation 2013.04.05. the decision.
Ensuring the principle of examination.
  Thus, the Court of Cassation enshrined the active obligation of the court to notify the parties1, and if the fact that the person who changed the address was not notified was not confirmed by fiction, that party could abuse its procedural rights at any time, and the Court of Appeal would have to overturn the first instance decision. send for a new test.
In connection with the notification, the city of RF. trial Article 117 of the Code of Criminal Procedure defines such a fiction. If the addressee refuses to receive the court notice, he / she is considered to have been duly notified of the place and time of the court hearing.
 We think it is inexpedient to envisage such a fiction-norm, as certain problems may arise, in particular, how can the court be convinced that the addressee has refused the notification, or that the notifier may be an interested person, մեջ in the return notice? "Refused" to make a note.
  And the RA city. trial From the point of view of Article 80 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, it is reasonable, as persons who have already participated in the court session, exercised relevant procedural rights, should be interested in their further implementation իրական are obliged to inform the court about the change of their address.
RA city. trial Examples of the fiction mentioned in the Code of Criminal Procedure are the provisions of Article 92 3 3, Article 108 2 2 և 3, which contribute to the principle of legal economy, in particular, the Court of Appeal may not address the issue of resumption in any other way, and the first The need for the court of first instance to decide on the resumption of the case disappears.
  RA city. trial According to Article 48, Part 3 of the Criminal Code. "If a party refuses (avoids) answering the questions of the court or participants in the trial or giving testimony to the court, the court may, through the mediation or initiative of the other party, consider the refusal (avoidance) of the testimony (answer) and the factual circumstances of the case about which the party refuses (). avoidance) of giving a statement or giving an answer may be considered proven.
  In any case, the refusal (avoidance) from the answer or testimony assessed as unfounded by the court is interpreted to the detriment of the refuser (evader).
 That is, in this case, the legislator left the use of fiction to the discretion of the court.
 We think that reserving the creation of fiction to the court would be a dangerous step, և the court should be a fiction practitioner, not a creator.
 In any case, the application of fiction by the court must either be based on the law, or derive from the law, or be obvious from the factual circumstances of the given case.
  For example, the following fiction may be established in connection with representation in court (or, if it is not defined, the judge may define it, as it follows from the objective reality). The actions of the representative in the court are considered to have been approved by the plaintiff; մասնակցել The representative's participation in the hearings already confirms the plaintiff's consent, as in practice it often happens that plaintiffs apply to the court of appeals if a court decision is unfavorable to them. See RA Court of Cassation 01.02.2008 No. 3-19 (VD), March 12, 2008 Decisions No. GD / 0287/02/08.
with the actions of the builder or rejected him.
  In such cases, it is difficult for the Court of Appeals to assess this fact, so it is necessary to either fix this fiction or give the courts the opportunity to define it.
  We think that in connection with the appointment of the expertise, it is necessary to follow the example of the Russian Federation, to fix the following function in the Code of Civil Procedure: trial According to Article 79 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. "If one of the parties avoids the examination or does not present the items and documents necessary for the examination, it is not possible to carry out the examination without his participation, the court has the right to recognize the fact (which had to be confirmed by the examination) confirmed or denied."
Let's bring the following example from practice. The authenticity of the signature is disputed in court; արանը the court appoints a forensic handwriting examination, but the person whose signature is to be verified by an examination refrains from participating in it, giving free or operational documents.
  In this case, the court may accept that the signatures were indeed made by that person.
 But in any case, when applying this fiction, the court must proceed from the facts of a specific case, the reasons of the parties, the reasons for refusing the expertise, and other circumstances.
 We believe that during an administrative proceeding, when one party is the administrative body,'s advantage over the other party in terms of evidence, the following fiction should be fixed in order to ensure equality of the parties and the principles of competition. If the administrative body, which has to provide written evidence related to the administrative proceedings, does not present them, the court may consider that the information contained in them is not in the interests of that party and is accepted by the party.
  This fiction is necessary because in practice there have often been cases where specific written evidence can only be available to an administrative body in connection with its initiation of an administrative proceeding, for example, when a sole proprietor or legal entity has applied for termination or liquidation. և hand over the registration certificate to the competent body, but on the grounds of non-fulfillment of the tax obligations, the tax body submits a confiscation claim to the administrative court.
  In such cases, how can a person prove the fact of liquidation or termination of activity, if that evidence is in the possession of the administrative body?
  In such problematic situations the problem of using fiction arises.
Thus, analyzing the fictions of procedural law, we come to the conclusion that they contribute to the implementation of procedural norms, prevent their postponement, as they are aimed at ensuring competition and equality of the parties during the trial.
  Fiction facilitates the transfer of everyday reality to the legal sphere, simplifies legal relations, makes legal regulation more stable and effective, promotes the protection of citizens' rights, helps to achieve justice, reduces the process and scope of legislative activities, facilitates the establishment of certain conditions, makes the legal system more economical. contributes to the effectiveness of legislative activity, comprehensive։ objective evaluation of evidence.
Lilit Petrosyan LEGAL FICTIONS. THEORETICAL AND LEGISLATIVE ISSUES Keywords: fiction, legislative technique, established fact, false assertion, evidence, public law.
