COSMETICS AND HUMANITY RELIGIOUS SYSTEM OF THE MAYANS Studying the ideas of the Maya about the origin of the world, the celestial bodies and the creation of man in the XVI century. Comparing the data left by the Indian-Spanish chroniclers with the legends of other Mesoamerican peoples (such as the Aztecs), we can clearly prove the cultural syncretism that existed among them.
 It should be noted that our information about the Maya is based more on the mythological layer.
Like the Aztecs, the Fink, and the Maya, they believed in the existence of time periods at all levels of society.
They viewed the existence of the universe as a "great length" age group, that is, a little less than 5,200 years, divided into 13 small cycles.
  According to one of the Mayan calendars, the world was created in BC. 31 August 3114 և should have been destroyed in 2012. December 23, when the time cycle of the "Earth Account" would come to an end.
 According to some sources, the previous world was destroyed as a result of a great flood, during which the sky fell on American lands, the light disappeared.
After that, a relative pause was established between the two worlds.
This period is known for its magic and heroic deeds, the description of which we see in the book "Popol-Vukh", where one of the stories describes the birth of the first pair of hero-twins.
 The latter are considered the sons of the previous creators "maintain the connection between the two worlds".
 When the hero-twins mature, they are called Shibalba, an underground kingdom, because of playing ball with a lot of noise.
  After severe torture, they are sentenced to death, and one of them is hanged on a pumpkin tree.
 The daughter of one of the underground rulers once passed by that tree, թ the saliva of her head flowed and fell into her hand, as a result of which the latter became pregnant1.
After this incident, the daughter of the underground ruler is exiled, where she gives birth to a new pair of legendary hero-twins.
  When they grew up, they performed many heroic deeds. First they defeated their alien, evil brothers, turning them into human-monkeys (who, according to legend, later became the patrons of artists, actors, dancers), and then killed the terrible bird Vukub-Kakish and pulled out its teeth, which fired explosive bullets.
There is another story in "Popol-Vukh", according to which Hun Hunakhpun րաnra's brother was summoned by the rulers of Shibalba to an underground king.
to play ball, but after being defeated, they are persecuted and ostracized 1.
 But the gods of heaven bring them to life, and after killing their enemies, they bring to life their father, the god of corn.
In Mayan legends, the world was created out of nothing, we can say, by the will of the only gods, according to them.
  Thebey և Gukumats, also known as the Aztec god Kukulkan's Quetzalquatl, is considered the creator god.
  It should be noted that they were the first creatures in the world. They were distinguished by their wisdom.
In order to maintain their power, Thebe and Gukumats decided to create a people who could worship them.
 The process led by Thebe եյ Gukumatsi is carried out by the wind god Khurakan.
  The world is created, և the gods make several unsuccessful attempts to create any of their peoples.
 In the beginning, animals are created, but they are not able to bow down to their creators and are expelled from the forest.
  Man is unsuccessfully created from clay, which soon crumbles, and then from wood, the creation of which was so mindless that it is immediately destroyed.
  They are replaced by humans made of flesh, but they wipe out the wicked and are destroyed by a terrible flood sent by the gods.
 Only after that are people made from corn flour3.
 The corn flour, which is an integral part of their diet, in fact, the ancient Mayans based their creation on, believing that they were created from what they eat.
 The above gives us the right to think that this is the reason for the cannibalism, which was widespread among the tribe under study.
After all, humans were created to worship the gods, to serve them, to do what they please.
  For this reason, it was important to engage in various trades, such as jewelry, pottery, and precious stone processing.
 The Mayans created artistic values ​​not to please themselves, but to please the gods.
Each capital of the Mayan state had its own legend about the creation of the world, which was connected with the name of the ancestors of the ruling dynasty of that city.
 One of these legends is preserved in the inscriptions of the Temple of the Cross built in the time of Hanab Pakaliordi Kan Balam in Palenque.
According to that legend, the First Father was born eight years after the destruction of the previous world, and 540 days later, the First Mother, who gave birth to Cavill (considered one of the main gods of the Maya, the ruler of the elements).
  The latter was depicted as an eagle, with a long tube on his forehead, he was always considered the patron saint of the royal house of that city.
The Yok-Kab universe was depicted by the ancient Mayans as two superimposed worlds.
  Right above the earth were the thirteen heavens or the thirteen celestial layers, and beneath the earth were hidden the nine extraterrestrial worlds, which formed hell.
The ancient Mayan ideas about the cosmos are interesting.
  They had no doubt that the earth was square, in the extreme, rectangular.
 The sky, as a roof, rests on five pillars: 1 For details, see Usoboy N., Затерянный мир майя, Moscow, 1997, p. 56.
2 See Co. M., May. Disappeared civilization.
 legends and facts, Moscow, 2003, p. 213.
3 For details, see "Popol-Vuh", Moscow, 1982, page 76.
four colored trees in the four corners of the center of the world.
 Thus, it can be assumed that the Mayans adapted the plans of their ancient houses to the surrounding world.
  As we have already mentioned, the sky was guarded by four different trees on all four sides, and in the middle was the green tree, which was sometimes called the "Tree of Life".
  In the four corners, which clearly coincided with the four corners of the earth, grew the four World Trees.
 The red tree, which symbolized the color of the morning sun, grew in the east, and the white tree in the north.
  The ostrich, symbolizing the night, stood in the west, and in the south, the yellow tree, symbolizing the's.
In the windy rays of the "Tree of Life" there was a green paradise, where the souls of the righteous rested from earthly cares, from the tropical suffocation, enjoyed peace, tasted wonderful food.
Interestingly, the Mayan conception of the thirteen heavens was not unfounded.
 They are the direct result of a long, careful observation of the movement of the Mayan celestial lights.
  These studies, carried out with the naked eye by both the ancient Mayan astronomers and the Olmecs, enabled them to trace the movement of the moon, Venus, to the visible horizon of Venus.
  The Mayans, paying close attention to the skylights, could not help but notice that they move not like twinkling stars, but each has its own way.
 They thought that each luminaire has its own sky, moreover, long-term observations allowed to clarify, even to specify the one-year way of those luminaires.
 The starry paths of Ar divided the Mayans according to the origin of the stars.
  It turned out that such divisions of time are thirteen, in each of which the moon remains for twenty days.
The thirteen twenty-day months formed a whole year, which began with the return of winter.
The star clusters through which these routes passed were easily associated with mythical or real animals due to their Mayan presence.
  This is how the patrons of the astronomical calendar appeared: the snake, the scorpion, the bird with the beast's head, the long-nosed monster and others.
 Interestingly, for example, the familiar Gemini constellation corresponds to the Mayan constellation Turtle.
The Mayans' ideas about the universe are mostly known to us - not surprising, but the information we have about their ideas about the underworld is very limited, mostly inexplicable.
 We can not even say why they are exactly nine (և not eight or ten).
  Only the ruler of hell, Ah Puch, is known, who is considered the god of death, the ruler of the underground world, the worst of the 9 worlds of hell.
  He is usually depicted as a skeleton, in the form of a body or an anthropomorph, with a skull instead of a head, with traces on the body, and the headdress has the appearance of an owl or a cayman.
 However, we know detailed information about the number of underground worlds and its explanation.
Thus, in general, the Mayans, having a unique geographical location, being different from other peoples of the world, have created quite different cosmic-anthropogenic myths, often adapting them to their culture, climate, lifestyle and worldview.
Human myths are based on the idea that the gods created humans to feed and worship at the time of the discovery of corn (May).
  Only the May flour gods were able to create a people who met all their requirements.
Nazeli Hayrapetyan SPATIALISM AND HUMANITY RELIGIOUS COORDINATION OF THE MAYANS Keywords: Mesoamerican, Maya, "Popol-Vukh", cosmology, human birth, hero-twins, celestial lights, world
