PROBLEMS OF INVESTIGATION IN CRIMINAL TRIALS Maintaining the rule of law in any country is the common task of all state structures.
  However, there are special specialized structures in the system of state bodies to ensure legality.
  All of them constitute the system of law enforcement bodies, which fully directs its efforts to the realization of the problems of justice: the protection of the individual (his rights և freedoms), the society (his material-caring values), the state (his sovereignty և territorial integrity) 1
.
Historical roots should be taken into account when studying any field in general.
  However, the legal regulation of each sphere must reflect the objective realities of public life of a specific period.
  This is especially true at the stage of judicial reform in the Republic of Armenia, when a new draft Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) has been developed.
  During the criminal justice reforms, the task was set to review the current system of pre-trial proceedings և legal regulation.
  RA criminal trial According to the current legislation, the criminal investigation of the criminal case is preceded by the pre-trial investigation, which consists of the stage of initiating the criminal case, the preliminary investigation.
  Investigation և Preliminary investigation is related to the activities of the preliminary investigation bodies.
The investigation, as the initial part of the investigation of the case, is carried out by the investigative bodies, it includes the implementation of urgent investigative actions, operative-investigative measures.
Preliminary investigation is the main part of the pre-trial investigation of a criminal case, the purpose of which is to conduct a comprehensive, complete and objective investigation of the case.
  The pre-investigation bodies have a significant role in ensuring the rapid and complete detection of crimes, exposing criminals and ensuring the inevitability of criminal liability for the committed crime.
Investigation, as an independent type of preliminary investigation, is important for the implementation of criminal proceedings.
This institute was first introduced to the criminal trial of Armenia in the 19th century. in the second half 2.
  In the First Republic of Armenia 1 See Gutsenko K., Kovalev M., Legal Protection Organs, Moscow, 1997, Page 5.
2 See "RA Judiciary և Law Enforcement Bodies", Yerevan, 2009, p. 107.
 Judicial reforms were carried out by the Russian Emperor Alexander III in 1864. Based on court charters.
 Procedural rules were set especially for the Transcaucasia.
 Vagharshyan A., The Judicial System of the First Republic of Armenia (1918-1920), Yerevan, 2006, p. 122.
The heat was carried out by the militia bodies.
 The main purpose of the investigation during this period was to find out whether there were any features of a crime or misdemeanor in the act1.
 In addition, the police took measures to prevent the disappearance and disappearance of traces of the crime,։ the suspect did not avoid the investigation2.
  1923 in Soviet Armenia The Code of Criminal Procedure singled out the actions taken by the investigative bodies on the basis of the fact that in some cases the preliminary investigation was mandatory and in which cases it was not.
  According to Article 109 of the Code, when the investigator finds the materials of the investigation handed over to him sufficiently complete, և the case is sufficiently covered, he may not conduct a preliminary investigation or may be satisfied only by carrying out separate investigative actions.
  The Criminal Procedure Code of the Armenian SSR (1961) also singled out the forms of investigation by investigative bodies in connection with the existence of a preliminary investigation: a) cases in which a preliminary investigation was mandatory, b) cases in which a preliminary investigation was not mandatory3.
 The first type of activity in the litigation literature is called a section, and the second - a full investigation4.
In fact, the analysis of the historical development of this institute allows the following types of investigation to be distinguished: • Investigation as a method of verifying information about a crime.
• Full investigation (includes cases in which a preliminary investigation is not mandatory).
• Partial investigation (includes cases in which preliminary investigation is mandatory).
RA criminal trial The law stipulates the provision on the necessity of conducting preliminary investigation in all criminal cases, and consequently the interim investigation in our case.
 According to Part 2 of Article 188, the investigation may be the initial stage of the investigation within 10 days from the moment of initiating a criminal case.
  In other words, the judicial activity of the investigative bodies leads to the implementation of urgent investigative actions to strengthen the person who committed the crime and to find traces of the crime5.
  Article 56 of the Code provides an exhaustive list of investigative bodies.
  It is noteworthy that among the investigative bodies listed in the law, only the police is not attributed to its 1 1 See Kazinyan G., History of the Development of the Conversational Process in Armenia, Yerevan, 1999, p. 53.
2 See "Russian Legislation X — XX Centuries", vol. 8, Moscow, 1991, "Constitution of the Supreme Court", Article 256.
3 See H. Martirosyan, The Historical Development of Investigation և Preliminary Investigation in the I և II Republics of Armenia, Yerevan, 2007, pp. 64-65.
 Armenian SSR criminal case trial The court has exhaustively listed the cases with which the preliminary investigation is not obligatory.
  Exceptions are the cases when the prosecutor or the court considered the preliminary investigation obligatory.
4 See Strogovich M., Course of the Soviet Conversational Process, vol. 2, Moscow, 1970, page 27.
5 With modern insights, the conduct of urgent investigative actions by investigative bodies in cases in which a preliminary investigation is mandatory is not considered a type of investigation.
  Such an approach is set in the RF criminal case. trial in the basis of the Criminal Code, where the investigation is defined as a form of preliminary investigation carried out by the investigator (investigator) in criminal cases for which the preliminary investigation is not mandatory (RF Criminal Code, Article 5, item 8), see Bisharyan K. ., Investigation: Simplified Form of Preliminary Examination or Initial Stage, "State of Law", 2010, № 2 (48), pp. 50-54.
The type of cases to be investigated.
  And it is not accidental. The police are considered a multifunctional investigation body, as it is often called, a universal body.
  The fight against crime derives from the main functions of the police, so it investigates any reported crime under the RA Criminal Code.
 For the tax and customs bodies, the investigation is not a main function, but derives from other functions performed by them, for which they were created and operate.
Here, the legislature needs to endow the legislature with all the powers of indiscriminate powers with powers such as the use of coercive measures.
  For example, how should the rescue services arrest a suspect, for which there are many opportunities, if they do not have the necessary building conditions or staff to carry out such an urgent investigation?
  This refers to other means of coercion.
  By the way, in addition to providing special means to the operative staff of the rescue service bodies, it is necessary to solve the above-mentioned problems, which should be discussed from the point of view of carrying out operative-investigative-criminal measures by those bodies to identify perpetrators of crimes.
  The issues raised are subject to legislative regulation, otherwise empowering these investigative bodies to apply coercive measures will remain a good wish of the legislator.
 And from the other bodies of investigation, the police is in the best condition, about which on 16.05.2001. The law more or less clearly defined his responsibilities and rights as an investigative body.
 The national security bodies are in the system of the AAA service and due to the logistics of the latter չեն departmental regulation of the activities of the operative personnel, they do not face any difficulties in exercising their powers during the investigation.
  And the activities of the commanders of military units, military units, heads of military institutions have the opportunity to apply coercive measures, being regulated by the orders of the RA Minister of Defense.
RA current criminal trial The issue of expediency of maintaining the institution of investigation in criminal proceedings has become a subject of discussion of the reform works of the Criminal Code.
  According to the current legislation, the investigation is considered a separate stage of the preliminary investigation, which must be completed within ten days from the moment of initiating a criminal case.
  However, the first major change in the already developed draft in relation to pre-trial proceedings was that the investigation, as a separate stage of the investigation, was abolished, and the preliminary investigation begins from the moment of receiving a report on the crime, ie the stage of initiating a criminal case.
 According to the authors of the draft, the purpose of the change is to bring the legal relations related to the registration of crime reports and their legal response to the sphere of prosecutorial control.
  At the stage of initiating a criminal case, there is a risk of not initiating a criminal case without grounds, abuses or violations.
  Of course, this reform can be a precondition for reducing the latency of crimes. Latent crime is the part of crime that is not reflected in official statistics1.
  It has objective և subjective reasons. The objective reasons are related to the poor work of law enforcement agencies, the low level of information of this or that type of crime, and the subjective reasons are the failure of law enforcement agencies to register the crime due to corruption, concealment of shortcomings in their work, as well as failure to inform law enforcement agencies.
  As we mentioned above, there is a significant change in the ratio of the concepts of investigation and investigation in the draft.
 Article 6 6 6 of the draft defines the investigation as an activity carried out by the investigative body in support of it during the preliminary investigation, which includes the performance of operative investigative measures and covert investigative actions.
  Incorporating operative-investigative activities into the Criminal Procedure Code անվան Calling the process of carrying out operative-investigative measures during a criminal proceeding an investigation aims to make it more predictable, as well as to include it within the scope of prosecutorial control.
  The essential advantage of this change is that it provides strong guarantees from the point of view of ensuring the legitimate interests of the individual. Within the framework of the investigation, the results of certain operative-investigative measures, secret investigative actions (for example, wiretapping of telephone conversations, control of correspondence, etc.) acquire the probative value only in the conditions of providing all judicial guarantees.
 According to the current practice, if the operative-investigative bodies receive information about a specific crime, then outside the framework of the criminal proceedings, without the knowledge of the investigator, they actually carry out the process of gathering evidence.
  Such a settlement-based practice raises the following problems.1. Ignorance of human rights guarantees բաց Lack of effective control.
 Implementation of operative-investigative measures is a closed activity, during which the observance of human rights guarantees is beyond the effective control of the department, for example, the court allows the implementation of the telephone conversation measure, but does not check the procedure or the need to continue.
  From the point of view of ensuring human rights, the situation is aggravated when the implementation of operative-investigative measures to gather evidence in case of the presence of elements of an apparent crime does not provide sufficient results, հիմ no grounds for initiating a criminal case are obtained.
 In this situation, the person against whom secret operative-investigative measures have been carried out, after their completion is not informed about the secret operative-investigative measures taken against him, therefore he cannot demand to destroy the materials obtained about him.
1 See Kouyoumdjian M., A Comprehensive Dictionary of Armenian-English, Beirut, 1970, p. 221.
 Latent means hidden.
  This feature is peculiar to crime, as it is like an iceberg, the visible part of which is smaller than the invisible base under water.
2. Violation of the legal requirements for documentation of operative-investigative measures վ Disputing the admissibility of evidence.
 The study of the practice shows that the documents of the operative-intelligence bodies very often do not comply with the requirements of the legislation, as a result of which the obtained evidence is disputed.
  Thus, the decision to hold an operative-investigative measure in accordance with Part 2 of Article 34 of the RA Law on OHL և the motion to apply to court is submitted to the head of the body carrying out operative-investigative activity.
  According to the established practice, the above-mentioned documents are submitted to the court in the RA Police system not by the RA Police Chief, but by the RA Deputy Chief of Police for operative line.
 Ignoring this legislative requirement can be considered a violation of human rights, as the law has recognized the Chief of Police of the Republic of Armenia, who is the highest guarantee, as a proper subject to apply for restriction of human constitutional rights, and not his deputy.
 Here it is appropriate to quote a decision of the European Court. Sefilyan v. The Republic of Armenia, in paragraph 128 of the judgment of 02.10.2012, the European Court considered the permission to control the telephone conversation exclusively with a well-founded motion submitted by the head of a specific service as a guarantee against arbitrary interference by the government.
We think that in terms of including the activity of operative-investigative bodies in the sphere of prosecutorial control, it is expedient to change the constitutional notion of "investigation".
  Consider an investigation the whole process of preparing materials to resolve the issue from the moment of receiving a report of a crime or directly detecting the characteristics of a crime, which is based on the main tasks of the investigation. The investigation of a crime with "hot tracks", therefore, the important role of the investigative body should be conditioned by the fact that, as a rule, only the investigative body will have the authority to receive and register reports of crimes committed or being prepared.
The analysis of the existing practice shows that the investigative bodies, due to their main powers, are the first to discover the case of the crime, carry out urgent investigative actions aimed at strengthening the traces of the crime, preventing the crime, as well as arresting the suspect.
  In all cases, the record drawn up by the investigative body for the purpose of carrying out the prosecutorial control during the registration of each report on the crime shall be sent to the prosecutor immediately, not later than within 12 hours.
  We do not rule out the situation when in different circumstances the report on the crime is immediately received by the prosecutor.
 In accordance with our proposed approach, the prosecutor: a) instructs the investigative body to conduct an investigation if necessary to find out the features of the crime; b) instructs the investigator to make a decision on initiating a preliminary investigation in accordance with the rules of investigative jurisdiction provided by law. moreover, such an instruction of the prosecutor must be obligatory for the investigator չ not be subject to appeal by him.
 This option proposed by us will eliminate the contradictions between the Code and the Constitution, as the provision of prosecutorial control over the legality of actions from the moment of receiving a report to the moment of initiating a criminal case is not among the prosecutorial powers enshrined in the Constitution.
The combination of investigative actions, operative-investigative measures is characteristic for the investigative bodies.
  The law authorizes the investigative body to carry out urgent investigative actions.
  Cr. trial According to Article 57 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the number of urgents includes the investigative actions aimed at finding and fixing evidence, which must be carried out immediately.
  Failure to do so may result in the disappearance, loss, distortion or falsification of evidence.
 The list of urgent investigative actions to be carried out by the investigative bodies is exhaustive in the law.
 It means that during the investigation the investigation bodies do not have the right to carry out other investigative actions.
  We believe that it is necessary to reserve the right to the investigative bodies to carry out any investigative action aimed at detecting and strengthening the traces of the crime, which will be considered urgent in a specific case, as it is not possible to determine in advance whether this or that investigation is urgent. This, of course, refers to investigative actions aimed at finding, gathering and consolidating evidence with hot air.
In order to reduce the burden of preliminary investigation in the draft, it is proposed to introduce the institution of simplified preliminary investigation in criminal proceedings.
  The peculiarity of this institution is that the subject of evidence is limited, taking into account the nature of the crime and the degree of danger, and the main burden of the evidentiary activity falls on the stage of judicial examination.
 On the other hand, the model of the draft on pre-trial proceedings is not perfect for the following reasons: Due to the overload of investigators, the quality, full investigation of all criminal cases, the rationality of the investigation is not ensured, as in all criminal cases, regardless of the severity of the crime, the preliminary investigation is carried out by the investigator.
 The responsibility for individual investigative actions during the preliminary investigation lies with the investigator, which may increase the risk of negligence or poor quality of the individual investigative actions performed by the investigative bodies.
  We think that in order to "unload" the investigators, it is expedient to reserve all criminal cases on minor crimes to the subordination of the investigation bodies.
  It follows from the above that the introduction of a full-fledged institute of investigation in criminal proceedings may be an analysis of this issue.
  But the current code stipulates that no criminal case can end with an investigation. The necessity of preliminary investigation in all cases has both obvious advantages and disadvantages.
  One of the advantages is that a uniform legal regime of investigation is established for all crimes, which ensures the implementation of such a strong principle in pre-trial proceedings as the equality of all before the law.
 However, the undifferentiated approach to pre-trial proceedings, moreover, without exception to all criminal cases, can not be considered justified, as it has no objective grounds.
  This diminishes the role and significance of the investigation. The investigator, as a rule, repeats the urgent investigative actions carried out by the investigative body, and the performance of the obligatory preliminary investigation in some cases of less complex cases deprives the preliminary investigation body of sufficient resources.
  This leads to loss of time, material means, exaggeration of the preliminary investigation bodies1.
 In order to eliminate this shortcoming of the Code, it is also possible to envisage differentiated forms of investigation, for example, the Italian criminal trial is characterized by a three-pronged examination. 1. police investigation, 2. brief investigation, 3. case investigation.
The choice of this or that horse depends on the degree of complexity of the case, the number of investigative actions required, and the variety2.
And in the presence of a full investigation, it turns out that the investigative body initiates a criminal case, undertakes all the procedural actions defined by the Criminal Procedure Code on all the circumstances to be proved.
 The investigation is carried out in its entirety, ending with the issuance of an indictment or criminal conviction.
  In case of disagreement with the instructions of the supervising prosecutor, the investigative body may appeal them to the superior prosecutor, without suspending their execution3.
  The investigation must be completed no later than 1 month after the initiation of the criminal case.
  This term may be extended for not more than 1 month with the permission of the supervising prosecutor.
The current law stipulates four conditions for the completion of the investigation. 1. the term of the investigation ends, 2. before the term of the investigation expires, the person who committed the crime appears, 3. the prosecutor hands over the case under investigation to the investigator for preliminary investigation, 4. the investigator is involved in the investigation of the case.
1 See Ghazinyan G., Historical and current issues of criminal proceedings in Armenia, Yerevan, 2001, p. 313.
2 See Lubensky A., Preliminary examination of the legislature of capitalist governments, Moscow, 1977, p. 21.
3 Current criminal trial One of the gaps in the Code is that the powers of the investigative body or its head do not directly mention the possibility of appealing the decisions or instructions of the investigator or the supervising prosecutor.
In our opinion, the last condition for the completion of the investigation needs to be clarified.
 It follows from the law that there are two legal grounds for involving an investigator in a preliminary investigation. to hand over to the investigator with the authority of the prosecutor mentioned in the law.
 RA criminal trial For example, from the wording of Article 196, Part 2, Clause 3 (the investigator is involved in the investigation of the case), it is generally clear on whose initiative in this case, on what legal basis the investigation is terminated.
 We believe that, apart from the two grounds mentioned in the law, the investigator should not be involved in the investigation of the case in any other way.
 In such a case, he is not lawful. trial Article 55, Part 4, Clause 9 of the Criminal Code, according to which the investigator is authorized to go to the scene of the crime upon receiving a report from the investigation body, to be involved in the investigation of the case by initiating a criminal case or taking the initiated case.
Therefore, it is unnecessary to oblige the investigative body to immediately inform the investigator about the detected crime սկս the investigation initiated in the case (Criminal Procedure Code, Article 57, part 2, item 4).
Summarizing the above, it becomes obvious that a properly conducted pre-trial proceedings in court is a possible precondition for a comprehensive, complete, objective examination of the circumstances of the case, as well as a legal and reasoned verdict.
 The content of the legal relations կազմ the content of this stage must ensure the promptness, speed and efficiency of the investigation, which implies a clear separation of judicial functions in the conditions of maximum protection of individual rights and freedoms.
 Therefore, the role of both the investigation and the pre-investigation bodies should be assessed, but in a way that does not lead to any abuse.
  The powers of the investigative bodies are even more limited in the draft, which reduces the criminal value of the investigation institute.
  The work of these bodies is quite difficult և saturated.
  Taking into account the fact that the investigative bodies, due to their basic powers, are the first to detect a crime, carry out the strengthening of traces of the crime, prevent the crime, as well as urgent investigations aimed at arresting the suspect, they must maintain their independence and be completely independent of the preliminary investigation body.
Arpine Sargsyan THE ISSUES OF THE INVESTIGATION IN CRIMINAL TRIAL Keywords: investigation, full investigation, investigative body, powers of the investigative body, term of the investigation, prosecutorial control, operative-investigative measures.
