INDO-EUROPEAN * Arg'- "WHITE" AND * Rēmo- "BLACK" COMPETITIONS IN CASCIAN LOCALISM 1 Armen Petrosyan , Mayonic, Irish, Indian, Iranian, German, Roman, Asia Minor) as well as non-Indo-European (Khurian, Urartian, Mesopotamian, Caucasian) parallels.
The author has restored the prototype of Aram's mythological plot, where the hero named * Rēmo- "s" is opposed to * Arg - "white" hero.
 The author finds the nominal roots of this pair of opposite white and white characters, often related to similar plots, reflected in the Balkans, Asia Minor, the Armenian Highlands, the Caucasus, Eastern and Western Europe, Mesopotamia, Iran, India, etc. It has been widespread and localized not only among the Indo-European peoples, but also in the inhabited territories of non-Indo-European tribes with various relations with them since ancient times.
The purpose of our article is to use the prototype of the above-mentioned mythological plot to find toponyms with the composition h-e * Arg - "white" և Rēmo- "s" in the places mentioned in the territory of the Caskian tribes.
 The discovery of mythical characters, plots, etc. is a subject of further study.
The spiritual culture of the Caspian tribes, the only source of which is the place-names, surnames and nicknames, allow to restore the original preconceived notions of these tribes.
Toponyms ending in -iya և -uwa are known to be non-ethnic, and the suffix -ška seems to indicate a more specific affiliation, such as Tatiška, Duduška, Munišga, Karikurišga, Zianteška, even Ka ։ka.
 In the northern toponyms of Hittite Asia Minor, the particle na-ura is often found, for example, Gazziura, Tiliura, Urauna, etc.
 Khatologists refer to this part as "1. spring, 2. fountain ”3.
1 The author expresses gratitude to Al. Cassian (Russian Institute for Humanitarian Studies, Russia) for providing literature ելու for making a number of valuable remarks.
2 Petrosyan A., The Myth of Aram in the Context of Indo-European Mythology խնդիրը The Problem of Armenian Birth, Yerevan, 1997.
 http:
//armscoop.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/Arami-Araspel1.pdf. http:
//colchianstudies.files.wordpress.com/2010/11/singer__kaska__phasis_20071.pdf. As for Kaska personal names, here, as I. Zinger means, we are dealing with some problems.
(b) In the Hittite sources, for the northern regions, there are personal names which contain other ethnolinguistic elements, for example, Kaškaili, where the suffix -aili is a suffix indicating belonging to the Hittite 1, as well as Kaškamuwa, where -
uwa is a typical Luwian suffix.
This can only testify to the fact that there was an H-e element in the territory of the Kaska tribes. It is a matter of future study what specific language speakers were in that area.
I. Zinger distinguishes the proximity of the Nakhatak-Kaska mythological names.
Some rituals describe the gods of the land of Cascae as gods of an enemy land fighting against the gods of Khati.
  In one ritual it is mentioned that the helmets surrounded the gods of the land of Khatt - Zithariya, the god Ar of the city of Arinna, the god of thunder of Nerik, the god of thunder and the guardian god Telepinu.
  The god Zithariya, the chief deity of the Casques, originated in the northern city of Zithara, where one of the last cult attributes was KUŠkurša, something made of sheep wool.
The Hittite (Khata-Kaskakan?) Equivalent of the Greek Golden Fleece մանրամասն spoke in detail about their reflections in the Armenian traditions. Martirosyan.
 In his article, he rightly finds that the sacrificial animal that hung from a tree was of great importance both in the northern regions of the Armenian Highlands and in the Hittite and Caucasian ritual systems.
 It is obvious that the ritual in question in ancient times was mainly concentrated in the vicinity of the North Sea, north to east, east to south, including one of the largest accumulations of dragon stones, the Tayk / Chorokh hearth 2.
In the Hittite cult system, the equivalent of the աղ Golden Fleece σ of the Greek sources ἀσκός occupies a prominent place: kurša-, kurši- c. "(Sheep or goat) fur, fine. fur bag ".
  It hangs on an evergreen tree (probably "kenus, gland, Latin: taxus"); is happening.
This royal beauty has been moved from place to place during the big spring and autumn holidays to promote the well-being of nature3.
 It has been suggested that the Armenian word for "leather" comes from the Hittite Kurša dz4.
1 URUni-ši-li (IBoT 1.36 iii 64), na-a-ši-li (KBo 5.11 i 3), ne-eš- [u] m! -Ni- [li] (VBoT 2, 24) և ka -ni-šu-um-ni-l [i] (KUB 41.14, 8), երկիրը Nešite, Neša / Kaniš Kloekhorst A., Etymological Dictionary of the Hittite InheritedLexicon (= Leiden Indo-European Etymological Dictionary Series 5), Leiden- Boston, 2008, 008, 3. http.
//www.kloek2 Martirosyan H., Farn of the Mountain Source, the Goddess of the Dawn զոհ Sacrifice of the head and fur on the semantic basis of dragon statues (in print).
3 Ibid., P.
4 In the same place.
The existing similarities and similarities between the Kasker և Khater myths have led experts to believe that the Kask դ mythology is a local version of the Khatաթ mythology.
  The existing Khata-Caskian similarities are found mainly from the etymologies of toponyms and eponyms.
 Still in 1961. Գ. Georgadze came to the conclusion that the Casks were an isolated, localized version of the Khatak tribes, taking refuge in the north during the Hittite invasions.
  There are large traces of the local population in the coastal regions, which, as historical experience has shown, have assimilated into a new, newly arrived population to form a qualitatively new, mixed culture1.
As I. According to Zinger, the relations between the Khats and the Kaskas should be viewed from this position, that is, the Khats lived in the most fertile river valleys, had their political centers, Khatusas, Zalpa, and merged with the Hittites.
  And the population of isolated, mountainous regions is known to us as Kasker.
 We share this view.
Where should a border be drawn between the cultural areas of the Khats և other ethnic groups և.
During the reign of Mursilis II, the "Khatimij" border of Kasker's country passed through the land of Kumesmaha.
  In the areas east of Durmita, the Caspian lands are mentioned, which occupied the region of the Asharpa Mountains, thus blocking the road to the country of Pala.
V. Khachatryan suggests looking for the country of Caskian Tsikharia in this region, which occupied the region of Tarikarimu mountains2.
Hittite texts mention the Kumanišmaḫ or Kumušmaա land, the river Kumušmaĥ.
  The latter got its name from the country near Kumanišmaḫ, which և A. von Schuler և The catalog is published in the country of Casker 3.
  The god of thunder, Malita, is mentioned here.
  In our opinion, the river Kumušmaĥ is evidence of the existence of an Armenian population in the region.
Thus, the Aratsani river's name Artsania dz (cf. * arg '-) has been known since the IX century, used for the lower reaches of the river.
 The upper reaches of the Euphrates are called Mala in the Hittite inscriptions, which corresponds to the Urartian names Melia and the Greek Melas.
  These names are obviously compatible with the root h-e * mel- "s և, dark color", which արզexplainly explains the combination of Euphrates և Aratsani համապատասխան respectively և և և և "white" 4.
  Hmmt. The names of Megh, Meghraget, Meght in the Aratsani basin, which reach as far as Malatia.
A. von Schuler in his monograph in a separate sub-chapter lists the Casca toponyms, from which we separate the toponyms with the composition * - mali-.
Maliuha is mentioned once.
 Harpiš Ḫalmašuiz, Maliluhai Ḫatepiša, Karahna's KAL, Tawiniaya5 Šauška և Telepinu, Ḫakmiš Ḫuzziya պատ 6 were honored here.
namen der hethitischen Texte, Wiesbaden, 1978, p. 222. (hereinafter referred to as RGTC 06) 4 Petrosyan A., pp. 130, 131.
6 Ibid., P. 256.
 Gessell van B., Onomasticon of the Hittite Pantheon, Leiden, 1998, p. 77-79. Many of the listed toponyms և dynasties have Khatak (if not Caspian) origin.
The god DḪatepiša is the same as DḪalipinu (in Khater the masculine -l- becomes -t- in the feminine) URU Ḫalenzuwa / URU Ḫatenzuwa.
 In Khater, in our opinion, this name indicates the fact that there are common Khata-Casca deities.
  The second part of the legend, pinu, is the same as the second component of Tele-pinu, which means "son".
  * Aštan = un te = pinu «Արևի դիցուհուորդի», DIštanu DPalatappinu «Ištanu palate-pinu» Ištanu և her son »1.
  And the first part, Ḫate, is the same as the Khat ethnic unit, with which ողջ later the whole Hittite kingdom was called Khat.
The second component of the examined toponym - Maliluha, uha - is a Hittite toponymic suffix (cf. Samukha 2 և other), and the first part - Malil> * mel "sև, dark color".
Malimaliya is a dual mountain range, located on the road to Tahniwara.
 Cornelius identifies with Mama daĝ 3.
Hittite texts refer to the land of Kinar 4, which refers to the territory of the land of the Casques, and mentions the land of Maliwata.
In contrast to the mythological perceptions of h-e * mel- "s!, Dark color" with the root h-e, we must also have the toponym (s) with "white" composition as a result of the dual conjunction h-e, which will be evidenced by the presence of helmets. the existence of the population.
In the ancient history of Armenian mythology A. Petrosyan singled out the h-e toponyms սպիտակ characters with that "white" composition, he derives them from the h-e * arg "white" root, deriving the names Aram, Artsania, etc. from it.
The Indo-European Aram, Arim, Arm-'s derive from * rēmo, which only later in some languages ​​was later given the preposition a (cf. the ancient Indo-Rama, which could not be derived from Aram d), and from * rēmo և * arg'- in contrast, it is clearly Indo-European.
 Indo-European * rēmo is a derivative, with * rē-rootև * -mo- suffix, which according to Indo-European mythology means "dark, s", as opposed to * arg'- "white" 5.
 In our opinion, the Arme lands of the Caspian Armariha և šakmiš can be derived from the root "white".
  Thus, it is possible to find toponyms and epithets with the composition h-e in the areas of Casca residence.
Some experts distinguish genetic kinship between Central Asia Minor and Pontic tribes.
 It is also possible to have cultural contact between the Khats and the Khuris.
  Thus, the names and cults of the Khatri և gods գլխավոր the main gods ամ worship are influenced by the Khatri moon god Kašku-khur. Kušuh, khatakan Šimešu - khur. ։Imegi.
74), Netherlands, 2004, p. 143. (hereinafter referred to as HWHT) 2 Khati etymology has been suggested for the place name Samukha.
  URU ḫamuḫa (* ša – muḫ–
a; խաթ. . muḫ «sheep?»), see HWHT, p. 238. 4 Ibid., Pp. 209, 258.
5 Petrosyan A., page 122.
East of the Casker tribe is the Hayassa-Azz tribe.
  In the treaty signed between Hukkana "Supiluliuma", the Armenian deity is written with the ideology of DU.GUR, which, according to I. Zinger և E. Forrer, corresponds to the Khati god Šulinkate.
  As already mentioned, south of Halis, the mention of Tarumu has been separated, which corresponds to Khat. To Taru.
  If the Khatak substratum is separated in Armenia, then the spread of the Khatak tribes expands in the coastal regions of the Black Sea.
Benik Vardanyan INDEUROPEAN * Arg'- "WHITE" AND * Rēmo- "BLACK" PLACE NAMES IN CASCIAN LOCALISM սև », kurša- կաշի.
