A NUMBER OF CURRENT ISSUES RELATED TO THE OPERATIONAL AUTHORITIES OF THE RA CIVIL APPEAL COURT In the legal literature, the functional powers of the Court of Appeals are traditionally classified as organizational-regulatory.
By organizational-regulatory powers of the Court of Appeal, it is necessary to understand a certain scope of the rights and responsibilities of the Court of Appeal, which predetermine the initiation of an appellate proceeding, the preparation of an appellate hearing, and, in part, the process of an appellate hearing.
  By exercising these powers, the Court of Appeal responds to the actions of the persons involved in the case, which cause legal consequences1.
The preventive powers of the Court of Appeal are aimed at preventing an unlawful appeal, as well as from excluding the review of judicial acts in the presence of prohibitions stipulated by the procedural legislation; they hinder the further course of the origin of the appellate proceedings.
  Inhibitors may, in particular, have the power to return the appeal, to withdraw the appeal after the person who lodged the appeal has withdrawn the appeal.
In the legal literature, among the functional powers of the Court of Appeals are prophylactic powers, which are aimed at preventing and excluding possible new violations in civil proceedings3.
  The decision-making powers of the Court of Appeal include making private decisions.
 It should be noted that the RA Civil Procedure Code did not endow the Court of Appeals with 4 prophylactic powers5.
Private decisions are also called special decisions in Russian literature, as they are not aimed at resolving a civil case, but pursue a specific decision made during the examination of the case. 1 See Kuznetsov P., Excitement of cassation productions in civil works, p. 9, Timofeev G., Plenipotentiary court second instances in the civil process.
 Sovremenny Problems, Moscow, 2008, p. 82.
2 See Hovhannisyan V., The Problems of Reviewing Judicial Acts in Civil Procedure by the Procedure of Appeal, Yerevan, 2013, pp. 283-284.
3 See Puchinsky V., Cassation production in the Soviet civil process, Moscow, 1973, p. 25.
4 Adopted on 17.06.1998, entered into force on 01.01.1999.
  See ARPA 1998/20 (53), 09.09.1998.
Hereinafter referred to as the RA Civil Procedure Code or CPC.
5 See Hovhannisyan V., pp. 295-296.
To identify fears and to prevent their recurrence in the future1.
Private (special) decisions are described in the legal literature as a way of responding to individual significant violations of the law identified by a court during a trial.
These violations can be committed both by individual officials and by citizens աբանական legal entities2.
 However, these entities do not have to be persons participating in the case3.
 The court, being a state body, cannot but respond to the violations discovered during the examination of the case, to the shortcomings committed in the work of the officials.
When examining the legality of a judicial act of a court of first instance, the superior court may find violations of the rule of law which have given rise to a civil dispute, violations of substantive or procedural rules which have not affected the outcome of the case, and are not grounds for overturning the judicial act.
  The court must respond to such violations through private decision-making4.
  It should be noted that when it comes to the mistakes made by the extrajudicial court, they can be pointed out by the supreme court both in the case resolution (made as a result of the examination of the complaint) and in the special decision made for that purpose.
 The errors made by the lower courts are pointed out in order to exclude their repetition in the future5.
In this connection I. Zayts notes that private decision-making is the exclusive prerogative of the superior courts6.
  And N. Elizarov notes that private decisions contribute to the elimination of mistakes in the work of the courts, to the strict observance of the law by the courts7.
Thus, private decisions are defined as acts committed by officials in connection with the detection of violations committed by officials, individual citizens, as well as significant gaps and shortcomings in the activities of institutions, enterprises, organizations and their associations, NGOs8.
 Moreover, private decisions can refer to both participating and non-participating entities9.
As V. rightly states. Hovhannisyan, RA Judicial Legislation is Built on State Interference in Private Relations 1 See Edelson K., Basic Tasks and Forms of Activity of the Court of First Instance in the Soviet Civil Process, “A Short Anthology of the Ural Process.
  55 years of the civil process of the Ural State Governorate Academies ”, under order. В Еркова, Yekaterinburg, 2004, p. 63.
2 See "Civil Process", textbook, sub. OK. В. Яркова, 8-е изд., Москва, 2012, էջ 387.
3 See “Comments on the Civil Procedure Code of the Russian Federation”, under ed. Mr. Zhilina, 7th edition, Moscow, 2014, page 438.
4 See Timofeev J., p. 176.
5 See Hovhannisyan V., pp. 289-290, Puchinsky V., p. 25.
вым) судом, Москва, 1977, էջ 9.
8 See “Commentary on the Civil Procedure Code of the Russian Federation”, p. 438.
9 See Hovhannisyan V., pp. 290-291.
to limit the number, as well as on the basis of the principles of directorate.
 The courts of the Republic of Armenia may undertake the protection of the rights of the participants of the civil turnover, the elimination of the violations only upon the application of the interested persons.
Pursuant to Article 211 1 1 of the Judicial Code of the Republic of Armenia, the Court of Criminal Cases is obliged to make an additional decision if there are relevant grounds at the same time with the verdict, verdict or decision, which draws the attention of relevant state or local self-government officials to the case. on substantial violations committed during pre-trial administrative or criminal proceedings.
The RA legislation did not give the Court of Appeal (as well as the Court of General Jurisdiction) the authority to make private decisions in civil cases.
 V. Hovhannisyan considers such an approach correct when it comes to making a decision on the persons who did not participate in the examination of the case in the court of first instance.
  At the same time, V. Hovhannisyan thinks that the Court of Appeal should respond to the violations allowed by the court of first instance, but which are grounds for overturning the verdict.
 Moreover, it must be done within the framework of the decision made as a result of the review of the judgment.
 This is not about imposing sanctions on the court of first instance or giving instructions to it, but about responding to the violations that have taken place, recording them.
  This refers to, for example, the unnecessary postponement of the trial by the judge or the unnecessary suspension of the proceedings2.
For comparison, Article 3128 of the RA Administrative Procedure Code envisages the right of the RA Administrative Court to make an additional decision.
  If during the examination of the case the administrative court finds out that the state or local self-government body has committed gross or periodic violations of the rights of natural and legal persons, as well as other significant violations of the RA Constitution or law, the administrative court shall make an additional decision at the same time. draws the attention of the relevant official of the self-governing body and, if necessary, the latter to his / her superior on the significant violations that appeared during the court examination, which were committed during the pre-trial proceedings in the administrative case.
Such a decision may be made against licensed licensed entities if the evidence in a particular case has been provided by the latter.
The additional decision is sent to the official who committed the violation (licensing, licensing body), and if not, to the official who committed the violation, who is obliged to discuss it within one month after receiving the decision.
1 Adopted on 21.02.2007, entered into force on 18.05.2007.
  See ARPA 2007/20 (544) art. 489,18.04.2007.
 Hereinafter referred to as the RA Judicial Code or DO.
2 See Hovhannisyan V., pp. 291-292.
3 Adopted on 05.12.2013, entered into force on 07.01.2014.
  See ARPA 2013/73 (1013). 1186.1,28.12.2013.
 From now on, VDO.
Article 147 of the VDO envisages the right to make an additional decision by the RA Administrative Court of Appeal.
  Moreover, the Administrative Court of Appeal has the right to make an additional decision only in very limited cases.
  Pursuant to Article 144 2 2 of the CCP, the appellate court accepts the evidence not submitted to the administrative court by the trial participant, unless it considers that it is not essential for the resolution of the case.
 If the participant of the trial does not substantiate that he / she did not present the evidence during the examination of the case in the circumstances beyond his / her will, then the court costs, regardless of the outcome of the case, shall be borne by that participant in the trial.
  Part 1 of Article 147 of the VDO stipulates that in case the participant of the above-mentioned (who did not present the evidence in time) trial is a state or local self-government body or its official, the Court of Appeal makes an additional decision. in the manner prescribed by Article.
With regard to the right to make additional decisions, Article 1 3601 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code stipulates that the court, if there are appropriate grounds, is obliged to make an additional decision at the same time as the verdict or decision, drawing the attention of relevant state officials to significant violations. , which were allowed during the pre-trial proceedings in the criminal case.
  The additional decision is sent to the superior of the official who committed the violation, and in the absence of such, to the official who committed the violation.
 The official who made the additional decision is obliged to discuss the decision within a period of one month after receiving it, to take appropriate measures to eliminate the existing violations or to exclude such violations.
Based on the above, V. Hovhannisyan singles out the following features of a private decision: it is made at the same time as a judicial act (verdict, verdict or decision). the law envisages the possibility of making a separate private decision; - if there are appropriate grounds, the decision of the private decision is the responsibility of the court; - a private decision can be made only in case of detection of violations, - it is addressed to state and local government officials, where The fact of the violations committed by the above-mentioned persons must be substantiated - the private decision does not cause sanctions or obligatory legal consequences for the officials of state "local self-government bodies";
  See ARPA 1998/22 (55), 21.09.1998.
Hereinafter referred to as the RA Criminal Procedure Code or CRD.
- The obligation to inform the court about the conclusions or violations taken as a result of the discussion is not envisaged by law for state and local self-government bodies1.
Discussing the expediency of endowing the RA Civil Court of Appeal with the power to make private (special) decisions, we find that the granting of such power cannot be justified by the following reasons: for the protection of freedoms and legitimate interests.
  The same article stipulates that only persons endowed with such jurisdiction by law have the right to sue for the protection of the rights, freedoms and legitimate interests of other persons.
Article 3 of the CCP stipulates that the court initiates a civil case only on the basis of a claim or application.
In its numerous decisions, the RA Court of Cassation referred to Articles 3 և 131 of the CCP, repeatedly stating that the court is obliged to initiate a civil case only in case of a relevant claim or application, ք to examine the initiated case only within the framework of the claims submitted in that case2.
The above-mentioned rules are the cornerstones of the principle of dispositiveness (directorate), and civil litigation is primarily based on the principle of dispositiveness.
  Still E. Describing the principle of dispositiveness, Vaskovsky noted that "the characteristic feature of civil rights is that their implementation is entirely dependent on the holders of those rights."
The principle of disposition presupposes that the court should not protect the rights of persons who have not filed a relevant claim or application (including by means of a private decision), as otherwise, in addition to the principle of disposition, it will violate any arbitrary interference In the 4th part of Article 3 3 of the RA Civil Code.
Moreover, it should be taken into account that the task of the courts is not to fight against the offenders, to maintain the rule of law - general control, but to protect the violated rights, freedoms - legitimate interests, and the courts should not be endowed with general supervisory powers.
Similarly, it is not the task of the Court of Appeals to allow persons participating in the case or not to participate in the case before the civil case is heard. 1 See Hovhannisyan V., p.
2 See No. SD3 / 0010/02/12, KD1 / 0809/02/10, EKD / ​​3430/02/09, AVD / 0470/02/10, EKD / ​​1487/02/08, 31401 (VD), SHD1 / 0165/02/09, KD3 / 0099/02/09, EADD / 0638/02/08, ESHD / 0110/02/08, YAND / 2534/02/08, LD / 0423/02/08/370 / , 3-1132 (VD), 3-84 (VD), LD / 0409/02/08, EMD / 0630/02/08 և EAKD / 1939/02/08 decisions made by the RA Court of Cassation.
3 See Vasyakovsky E., Textbook of Civil Process, Moscow, 1917, p. 124.
4 Adopted on 05.05.1998, entered into force on 01.01.1999.
  See ARPA 1998/17 (50), 10.08.1998.
Hereinafter referred to as the RA Civil Code or the Criminal Code.
Detection of violations (detection (if they are not related to the grounds of appeal) և substantiation).
2) The Court of Appeal, as a body checking the legality and justification of judicial acts of the court of general jurisdiction, has the right to refer to ական assess the violations committed by the lower court during the examination of the case, but only within the limits of the appeal.
 These assessments should be set out in the decision made as a result of the grievance redressal, so there is no need to make a separate decision (private decision) in this regard.
Otherwise, if the appellate court addresses և assesses the violations allowed by the court of general jurisdiction չ which do not affect the outcome of the case, but are not indicated in the appeal, it will be reversed that the appellate court has gone beyond the grounds and grounds of the appeal.
Based on the above, we find that despite the positive significance and impact of private decisions, their existence in civil proceedings is not justified, therefore, the reservation of the authority to make such decisions to the Court of Appeal is also not justified.
Discussing the current issues related to the functional powers of the Court of Appeals, it is necessary not to touch upon the issue of clarification of the judicial act made by the Court of Appeals և / or correction of arithmetic errors, mistakes, typographical errors.
By the decision made in the civil case No. LD / 0376/02/09, the RA Court of Cassation referred to the significance and peculiarities of clarifying the verdict, stating that the clarification of the verdict is one of the means of eliminating the final parts of the verdict, which is aimed at correcting the ambiguities and ambiguities.
The Court of Cassation also stated that the legislature did not set clear criteria for the expediency of clarifying the judgment, so, taking into account that the clarification of the judgment is the court's competence and not the obligation, in all cases the court decides the need to clarify the judgment independently.
The need for clarification of the judgment should be conditioned only by the existence of such ambiguities in the final part of the judgment, which may give rise to double interpretation or complicate the execution of the judgment.
At the same time, the Court of Cassation emphasized that the court had the power to change the content of the judgment or to resolve issues that were not discussed in that judgment as a result of the clarification of the judgment1.
By the decision made in the civil case No. EKD / ​​3468/02/08, the RA Court of Cassation directly established that the RA Civil Court of Appeal does not have the authority to clarify its decision2.
This decision of the Court of Cassation is based on Article 35 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia (state and local self-government bodies and officials are authorized to perform only such actions, which 1 See the decision of the Court of Cassation of the Republic of Armenia dated 28.11.2014: No. LD / 0376/02/09 in a civil case.
2 See RA Court of Cassation 02.04.2010 the decision in the civil case No. EKD / ​​3468/02/08.
3 See ARPA 2005.12.05 / Special issue, art. 1426, hereinafter referred to as the RA Constitution.
as enshrined in the Constitution or the law), as well as the fact that the CCP did not directly grant the Court of Appeal such power, and the analogy of procedural law could not be applied.
This refers equally to the authority to correct errors, typographical errors and arithmetic errors in the judicial act, which in fact the Court of Appeal is also deprived of (for the same reason).
Ս. In this regard, Meghryan notes that the legislature allows to eliminate only the shortcomings in the judgments; does not allow the application of Articles 142 և 143 of the CCP to other judicial acts (including the decisions of the Court of Appeal).
  On the other hand, there may be an objective need to supplement or clarify any judicial act, to correct any errors, typographical errors or arithmetical errors.
 Moreover, the right to eliminate the existing defects in the judicial act should be reserved to the court that made the given judicial act.
 Any court should have the opportunity to clarify its own judicial act, its errors, typographical errors և to correct arithmetic errors1.
Later he also expressed such a position. Hovhannisyan, noting that each court should be guided by the principle of giving authority to clarify its own acts2.
  The rules of clarification of the judgment may be applied to the explanation of the decision of the Court of Appeal, taking into account the peculiarities of the review of judicial acts3.
The purpose of clarifying the judgment is to create the necessary conditions for its execution4, and the clarification of the decision of the Court of Appeal may be conditioned both by its execution and by the need to create the necessary conditions for a new examination of the case in the court of first instance.
  The decision of the Court of Appeal may be clarified before the trial of the case in the court of first instance, if a decision has been made to overturn the judicial act in whole or in part, the proceedings have been partially terminated or the claim has been dismissed, or until the execution if the court overturned partially overturned the conciliation agreement և amended the judicial act of the lower court5.
 A request for clarification of a judicial act may be submitted to the court that made it during the statute of limitations6.
V. Hovhannisyan proposes to replace the word "judgment" with the words "judicial act" in Article 143 of the CCP, which would give the Court of Appeals the power to clarify its judicial act, correct any errors, typographical errors and arithmetic errors7.
1 See Meghryan S., Judicial Acts on Civil Cases of the Court of First Instance, Yerevan, 2010, pp. 182-183.
2 See Hovhannisyan V., page 313.
3 See ibid., P. 315.
4 See Meghryan S., pp. 180-182.
5 See Hovhannisyan V., page 315.
6 See Meghryan S., p. 181.
7 See Hovhannisyan V., page 319.
Unlike the court of first instance, the CCP also endowed the appellate court with the power to make additional decisions.
 Ս. Meghryan proposes to provide an opportunity to supplement the decisions of superior courts with an additional decision, especially in cases when: 1) the Court of Appeal or the Court of Cassation has completely or partially overturned the judicial act, approved the conciliation agreement of the parties; 2) the Court of Appeal or the Court of Cassation has completely or partially overturned the judicial act; terminated the proceedings of the case in whole or in part or left the claim (application) in full or in part without examination; has not resolved the issue of court costs; 3) the Court of Appeal or the Court of Cassation has partially overturned the judicial act, without sending the case for a new examination, has changed it without making a decision on any of the declared claims or, resolving the issue of entitlement, without mentioning the amount allocated;
A similar proposal was made by V. Hovhannisyan 2.
The issue of the possibility of using the means of securing the claim by the Court of Appeals is also quite interesting.
  The means of securing a claim in civil proceedings are operative կողմից restrictions imposed by the court for a certain period of time 3, obstacles 4 և obligations 5, which are called to create appropriate guarantees to ensure the enforcement of judicial acts6.
Referring to the role of the institute of securing the claim, the RA Court of Cassation stated in its decisions that: - the main goal of the institute of securing the claim is to provide certain guarantees to ensure the fulfillment of the future judgment in the claim - to protect the plaintiff's legal interests from any negative consequences; in the event that failure to take such a measure may make it impossible or difficult to enforce the judgment or may worsen the status of the property in dispute.
Article 97 of the CCP stipulates that securing a claim is allowed at any stage of the proceedings.
 The phrase "at any stage of the proceedings" implies that it is applicable during the review of the judicial act.
  However, this norm has received a very limited interpretation in judicial practice. On the application of a security measure 1 See Meghryan S., pp. 183-184.
2 See Hovhannisyan V., page 321.
3 See Рябченко Л., Обеспечить - полдела. Main - to fulfill, "ЭЖ-Юрист", 2003, № 8, page 35.
4 See Puchkarev E., Решиние - не фикция, ЭЖ-Юрист ”, 2003, № 35, pp. 117-127.
5 See Rozhkova M., On the Determination of Arbitration Courts (their appeal, introduction to the law on the possessive properties), “Vastnik VAS RF”, 2006, № 3, p. 22.
6 See Treushnikov A., Enforcement measures in the arbitration process, "Legislation", 2003, № 8, page 15.
7 See RA Cassation Court, civil case No. ESHD / 0550/02/09, 30.07.2010. ով Administrative case No. VD / 0677/05/08 of the RA Court of Cassation on 30.04.2009 decisions.
8 See RA Court of Cassation 27.04.2012 the decision in civil case No. EMD / 1086/02/10.
In practice, a motion can only be filed in a court of general jurisdiction before the end of the trial.
 And the application of the means of securing the claim by the court of appeal is practically excluded at present.
  Such motions are rejected in court practice on the grounds of lack of appropriate authority before the RA Civil Court of Appeal.
We consider that such an approach is not justified, and the Court of Appeal should have the authority to guarantee and ensure the effective execution of the judicial act to be made.
 We substantiate the above with the following: 1) It is possible that the grounds for applying measures to secure the claim (the circumstances threatening the execution of the judicial act) arose during the review of the judicial act.
 It is possible that the plaintiff, for some reason, did not submit a relevant motion during the examination of the case in the court of first instance, he wants to submit it only in the court of appeal.
 The justice administered by the courts will be somewhat of a formal nature if such motions are rejected by the Court of Appeal, and therefore the judicial act remains imperfect.
For example, during the appeal of the judgment in the civil case No. EAKD / 1043/02/10, the plaintiff submitted a motion to the Court of Appeals to apply a security measure.
 That motion was submitted to the Court of Appeal on 10.01.2014. was rejected by the protocol decision on the grounds of lack of relevant authorities.
  Then, all the real estate belonging to him was alienated from the defendant, which seriously hindered the execution of the judicial act.
 2) The CCP does not contain any prohibition on the application of a security measure by the Court of Appeal.
 Article 97 of the CCP provides that securing a claim is allowed at any stage of the proceedings.
For comparison, Article 33 1 1 of the CCP stipulates that the parties may conclude the case by conciliation at any stage of the proceedings.
 Part 1 of Article 36 of the CCP stipulates that legal succession is possible at any stage of the trial.
  Moreover, both the signing of the reconciliation agreement and the legal succession can take place both in the first instance and in the Court of Cassation.
The Court of Appeal is deprived of the authority to apply measures to ensure the execution of the judicial act.
 Article 141 of the CCP stipulates that the orphanage may, at the request of the persons participating in the case, take measures to ensure the execution of the judgment after the decision has been made, while the appellate court does not have such authority.
 We think that such an approach is not justified.
  This is especially true in cases where the appellate court overturned, changed the decision of the court of general jurisdiction, by its decision establishing a completely different solution to the substantive dispute between the parties, as defined by the court decision.
In connection with this issue, it should be noted that Article 1 267 of the new draft of the RA Civil Procedure Code, enshrined in Article 1 of the RA Civil Procedure Code of the Law on Making Amendments to the Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia, allows the Court of Appeals to apply in case of reversing the court decision. Enforcement measures of the decision in the manner prescribed for the application of the means of securing the claim.
The issue of the authority to suspend the judicial act appealed by the Court of Appeals is also quite interesting.
In case of entering into legal force, the court decision acquires the features of undeniability, exclusivity, obligation, presumption և perfection2.
  Enforceability of the judgment is the need to carry out the actions envisaged by the judgment; in case of non-voluntary execution of the judgment, against the will of the obligated person, the possibility of its compulsory execution3.
  According to Article 14 of the CCP, a judicial act that has entered into legal force is binding on all state bodies, local self-government bodies, their officials, legal entities - citizens and is subject to execution throughout the territory of the Republic of Armenia.
It is indisputable that, as a rule, judicial acts that have not entered into legal force are appealed, but the CCP sets a number of exceptions to this rule.
 In particular, an appeal may be brought against a judicial act that has entered into force: - in case the appellant missed the deadline set by law for bringing an appeal, submitted a motion to consider the relevant deadline respectable, it was upheld by the Court of Appeal (CPC). Article 207 (6) - in exceptional cases when the court of general jurisdiction has committed such fundamental violations of substantive or procedural law, as a result of which the judicial act undermines the very essence of justice (Article 207- 7 of the CCP (part 5) - by a person who has not become a participant in the case, whose rights and responsibilities have been ruled by a court of general jurisdiction (Part 5 of the CCP).
In the above-mentioned cases, we are dealing with the appeal of a judicial act that has entered into legal force and is subject to enforcement.
 Therefore, we consider that it would be well-founded to reserve to the Court of Appeal the discretionary power to suspend the validity of the appealed judicial act, in cases when the Court of Appeal, if there are grounds established by the CCP, has accepted the appeal against the decision.
 Moreover, it should be noted that Part 3 of Article 204.37 of the CCP reserves such discretionary power to the Court of Appeal, but only in the event of a new case or new circumstances leading to a review of a judicial act.
1 See the draft law of the Republic of Armenia "On Making Amendments to the Civil Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia", in circulation, http.
//moj.am/storage/files/legal_acts/legal_acts_5394019566_Qax_dat_26.11.2012.pdf (20.09.2014), hereinafter referred to as the Draft.
2 See Petrosyan R., Civil Procedure of Armenia, 3rd edition, Yerevan, 2007, p. 474.
3 See ibid., P. 477.
Vahagn Grigoryan A NUMBER OF CURRENT ISSUES RELATED TO THE OPERATIONAL AUTHORITIES OF THE CIVIL CIVIL COURT OF APPEALS Keywords: Armenian, functional, judicial,
