APPLICATION OF VERBAL SIGNS IN PARUYR SEVAK'S POETRY. Symbols are word pairs that differ in pronunciation և express the opposite meaning 1.
 The expression of the opposite or opposite meaning of words is called an antonym.
 Antonyms are mainly typical of adjectives, less macabres, verbs, very few nouns and conjunctions2.
  According to many linguists, words will not become antonyms if different parts of speech are opposed to each other. The peculiarity of the adverb is that in the opposite sense they must be endowed with the same grammatical order, objects belonging to the class, phenomena, words expressing quality-attribute, such as adjective - light-dark, verb - approach-leave, macabre - very-little, connection - for - opposite, noun - light-dark, but opposite pairs can also be made from words belonging to other parts of speech, for example, red-skinned, sober-drunk, modest-greedy, etc.
Antonyms are linguistic, which objectively exist in a language (for example, heavy-light և, special-simple, happy-sad և, etc.) և verbal, which are characteristic only of the given word;
Antonyms are used as a stylistic trick in antitheses, which differ from the usual contrasts in their expressiveness, strong contrast, and special rhythm.
  In other words, in fiction, antonyms are used as a means of expression, creating contradictions.
Paruyr Szak is one of the greatest masters of creating contradictions with opposites.
 He created antonyms from "words belonging to the same" different parts of speech և from word-phrases.
  As it is known, opposition can be created not only through the use of antonyms, but also through counter-actions, images, thoughts, etc.
  In creating such contradictions, P. shines. Sևk's boundless talent.
We are few, but we are called Armenians…. There are no contradictory words in these lines, but the opposite is obvious.
 One can consider the little noun և the Armenian noun as antonyms, although it is one of the characteristic features of the little Armenian.
  In such cases P. The phrase expresses the opposite, however, through connections, as much as connections, and other similar words.
1 Margaryan A., Modern Armenian language.
 Vocabulary, Yerevan, 1993, pp. 99-100.
2 Sukiasyan A., Modern Armenian language.
 Vocabulary, Yerevan, 2004, p. 134.
Or, How և We did not see anything, dear, But we hoped… You want a lot, But where can I give you what you want…. Mention the places of the women Who could love us deeply, But we are like that We did not meet again!
He expressed the contrast in the lines, but through a link.
It is better not to have a home and a place in life than to be a housewife in art.
There are no antonyms here, but the author has created a perfect contrast through the link.
I do not know what should have changed, but I remained the same. In the lines, as in the first example, the contrast is expressed but through a link.
Even if your hand is deprived of a pen, You are the only one who must sing.
Let them not give any authority, You, one, you must deny the lie.
At least in the house, the words have created an obvious contrast.
They were born to be drunk, And you, to be drunk with you!
And the connection expresses the opposite.
The power of the pen is observed in the case of antagonisms created by the innovations he has created.
I am free, but let them hope.
In the example, the words "hopeless" and "hopeless" are antonyms.
  However, the linguistic antonyms easily obeyed his pen.
Or, Let's part one day, see each other for a year.
We just met, we broke up, we just found each other, we lost each other.
Divided-seen, met-separated, found-lost are linguistic signs.
There are boys and girls, there is a blonde, there is a squirrel. The adjectives blonde are linguistic antonyms.
And very often I jumped, And I could jump up.
Up and down verbs become antonyms by means of up and down antonyms.
If the roads of my world were only one-sided, just to come, and not to go ... This is also an example of the use of linguistic antonyms. If you have extra money, take it to the market! I am a seller, not a buyer.
Subordinate clauses are linguistic antonyms.
And I ran away from myself, I did not go to another place in vain, A foreign sphere with a foreign number, While I could stay….
 In this same poem, I did not accept in my heart, but I was silent and patient.
In the lines as antonyms are the negative conjugation of the simple verb և to endure the relative complexity (in the text), which, however, are not linguistic antonyms.
 An example of this is: No, I will entertain you with dense, and the troubled couple with dense խ. In this example, dense noun is contrasted with dense complexity.
P. In Saki's poetry, antonyms have interesting manifestations.
  One of them is that he was able to create counterattacks with several antitheses at the same time.
It is with this faith and hope, my friend, that in the world every day the poor sleep and wake up the rich. words in different parts of speech.
And you came like a master. A little late, but once and for all.
Here, the idiom of the antisympathetic pair is different.
Delayed, accompanying derby, once and for all, macbeth.
P. It is typical for a squirrel to make nicknames an antonym with a play on words. You are a wonderful girl in a fairy tale, while in life you are a bat, which is neither a bird nor a mouse.
In the lines, he contrasted the nouns girl-bat with the noun in such a way that at first glance it seems that the antonym is composed of a non-negative particle.
Or, Atilla's time to enter, But they do not manage to set fire նել .To enter րկ to enter և to betray the adjective verbs are antonyms.
  The language of Tsakyan is special in that he was able to translate even synonymous words with great skill.
They do not like again, they love again Again Ն again synonymous macabres are antonyms here.
P. The size of the wheel is especially trembling when he is able to perfectly contrast the same word in the context.
 There are several contexts where the word human is opposed to the word human, moreover, in all versions the opposition is created by changing the uppercase or lowercase letters.
There is a man, a man in the poem "Task to the world's calculators, to the precise devices": It is still possible to keep a person A person, or only to make a person a person եմ in the poem "And a man named Mashtots" And if letters and letters are to be remembered, then He is the capital letter, By which the simple and simple word Grows, reaches the symbol, And… man stretches and becomes Man …And in another poem he contrasted my pronoun.Help! me, Mariam, And let me tell you what. Intercede for me……. Word games are noteworthy, when opposite pairs of words belonging to the same or different parts of the word, but with the same root, are formed. They come late, but not too late.
And every poet objectsizes his temperament. Shows his difference from others.
In the first version, the adjective ուշ late և is a late adverb, and in the second, the other is և others.
  The last example has a unique feature. The noun otherness is a novelty, and the other name has given rise to a pronoun.
Summing up, let me mention that P. In Saki's poetry, verbal antonyms predominate, manifesting themselves in a variety of word games: linguistic antonyms, pronouns, synonyms, synonyms, as antonyms, not composed of negatives, which, by the way, is one of the simplest variants.
From the quantitative point of view, there are relatively few antonyms composed of other parts of speech: macabre, adjective, noun.
 Wonderful and fascinating are the word-word combination, the adverbial complexity, as well as the antonym pairs made up of parts of other words.
APPLICATION OF VERBAL SIGNS IN PARUYR SEVAK'S POETRYNare Aleksanyan Keywords: verbal features, parts of speech, synonyms, word-phrases, person.
