REVISION - THE FOUNDATION OF TERMINATION OF PROPERTY RIGHT In any system of law, the right to property acts as a central և most important institution.
The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Constitution), using the role of property rights in the whole system of law, enshrined provisions aimed at protecting the rights of the owner և legal interests.
The protection of the rights of the owner և legal interests is mostly used in case of compulsory termination of the property right, և to ensure it it is necessary to have a legal field, a problem that is not solved in the case of such a legal institution as erection.
  The study of the RA legislation shows that the requisition is applied in case of emergency circumstances, when it is necessary to immediately take the property belonging to the citizens և legal entities, in order to solve a number of priority issues.
  Taking into account the potential of the goals pursued by the application of the requisition, the provision of efficiency, the importance of providing guarantees for the protection of the owner's rights and legitimate interests, it is necessary to envisage the measures that can be applied in case of emergency.
Given the fact that no state is immune from emergencies, the study of property seizure relationships is becoming increasingly important.
According to Part 2 of Article 31 of the Constitution, "No one shall be deprived of his property except in cases provided for by law."
 It follows from the interpretation of Part 2 of Article 31 of the Constitution that a person may be deprived of his property only in cases provided by law, in other words, the grounds for deprivation of property must be clearly stipulated by law, moreover, a person can be deprived of property only in court.
The existence of guarantees for the protection of property rights is first and foremost used during the termination of property rights.
  Ways of termination of property rights can be classified based on whether the property right was terminated by the will of the owner, or against his will or against his will.
 The right of ownership against the will of the owner or against his will may be terminated only in cases provided by law, in the manner prescribed by 1.
1 See T. Barseghyan, Civil Law of the Republic of Armenia, part A, 3rd edition, Yerevan, 2009, p. 298.
Different views have been expressed in the literature on the concept of "requisition".
 The requisition is characterized as a traditional ground for termination of the property rights of citizens, legal entities, which is applied only in exceptional circumstances, in the public interest, with adequate compensation1.
The requisition is a ground for termination of the property right, during the application of which the property taken is used to fight against the circumstances of an emergency nature in order to eliminate their dangerous consequences2.
 The requisition (in a broad sense) is a complex system of dynamic legal relations, both public and private3.
O. Vinogradov offers the following definition of the concept of "requisition". "In the event of an emergency, state of emergency or martial law in accordance with federal law, the property may be alienated or temporarily taken from the owner in accordance with the interests of the individual, society, state or state in the manner prescribed by law, with compensation (requisition)" 4.
The requisition is a ground for termination of the right of ownership, the use of which leads to the termination of the property right of one person, and at the same time the origin of the property right of another person5.
V. According to Sityugina, the requisition is, on the one hand, a derivative basis for the termination of the right of ownership, and, on the other hand, the acquisition of the ownership of the property over the requisitioned property6.
According to Article 285, Part 1 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia), in case of natural disasters, technological accidents, epidemics, in other circumstances of emergency nature, the property may be taken from the owner by the decision of state bodies. for the benefit of the society, on the condition of paying its value (requisition). "
  Let us refer to the provision enshrined in Part 2 of Article 31 of the Constitution, considering it in the context of the application of the requisition.
 RA city. Considering Article 285 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in the context of the provision enshrined in Article 31 2 2 of the Constitution, it becomes clear that the law should provide for the specific cases of requisition, the grounds on which requisition may be applied.
 That is, the Constitution puts forward a clear requirement to define by law the cases in the presence of which it is possible to deprive a person of property, including in case of deprivation of a person due to the application of requisition.
1 See Gorbachev D., Constitutional Guarantees for the Protection of Property Rights, "Property and Law", 1997, available at http: // www.
//www.juristlib.ru/book_337.html.
2 See Taskin N., Requisites for one of the cases of forced extortion of property rights to terrestrial shares, "Lawyer", 2003, N 3, available at http: // www.
//www.lawmix.ru/comm/4148.
3 See Afanasyeva E., Requisites.
 civil law aspect, autoref. dis. к.ю.н., Томск, 2009, p. 105.
4 See Vinogradov O., Requisition as a special ridic foundation for the extension of property rights, "Possession and Law", 2008, N 12 (383), page 85.
5 See “Civil Law. Часть первая ”, textbook, in order. А. Kalpina, A. Maslyeva, Moscow, 1997, p. 244245.
6 See Sytygina V., Requisites.
 Problems of Legal Regulation, "Iridic Science", 2011, N 2, page 74, available at http: // www.
//cyberleninka.ru/article/n/rekvizitsiya-problemy-pravovogo-regulirovaniya.
Or RA city. The provisions of Article 285 of the Criminal Code are aimed at the legal settlement of the relations arising in connection with the confiscation. The law, in fact, defines only general provisions aimed at the legal settlement of the relations conditioned by the application of the requisition, in its turn referring to another legal act, which should clearly define the grounds, conditions, order and other issues of the confiscation.
  Unfortunately, it should be noted that no relevant law has been adopted so far, by which the above-mentioned issues will receive a comprehensive legal settlement.
In order for the law on the grounds for deprivation of property to be constitutional, the relevant legal procedures must be clearly formulated, the grounds for exercising the right of the state to be deprived of property "in cases provided by law" և the conditions 1.
In case of achieving extraordinary circumstances, RA city. Guided by the requirements set forth in Article 285 of the Code of Criminal Procedure can not be considered as a sufficient legal basis to take the property from the owner, - will lead to a violation of the requirements set by the Constitution.
  The constitutional principle of inviolability of property rights presupposes, first of all, that a person can be deprived of property rights only on grounds that are directly provided by legal acts with a level of law2.
 Furthermore, it is necessary to adopt a separate law on the requisition, which will define the legal procedures for the application of the requisition with sufficient clarity, the issues related to the conditions of application of the requisition, the property that can be forcibly taken for public benefit, compensation to the owner. etc., which will contribute to the protection of the owner իրավունք's legitimate interests.
It follows from the literal interpretation of Part 2 of Article 31 of the Constitution that a person may be deprived of property only by a court in cases prescribed by law.
  Part 2 of Article 31 of the Constitution declares all possible options of deprivation of property illegal, except for the cases provided by law - those carried out in court3.
Let's analyze the above-mentioned norm. in the context of Article 285 of the Criminal Code.
RA city. It follows from the interpretation of Article 285 of the Code of Criminal Procedure that the property may be taken from the owner not only by the decision of the court, but also by the competent state bodies.
  The term "state bodies" usually refers to state authorities (National Assembly, Government, judiciary) 4, while an analysis of Article 31 2 2 of the Constitution makes it clear that such a right can be reserved only for the court as the sole administrator of justice. of the body.
Different views are expressed in the literature on the settlement of the above-mentioned problem.
  Գ. According to Gaji, there are legal 1 See "Interpretations of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia", edited by G. Harutyunyan, A. Vagharshyan, Yerevan, 2010, p. 366.
2 See ibid., P. 365.
3 See ibid., P. 368.
4 See Ayvazyan N., Constitutional Law of the Republic of Armenia, 4th edition, Yerevan, 2008, p. 434.
norms that provide for the possibility of deprivation of property of a person without a court decision, but this does not contradict the requirements of the Constitution, as the owner has the right to appeal in court any act of deprivation of property1.
 Another group of lawyers considers that if the expression "in court" is interpreted as an opportunity for further appeal of any act, the constitutional guarantees of judicial protection of rights and freedoms will be violated2.
Մ. According to Malein, extrajudicial requisition can be used, as it is impossible to quickly, effectively prevent or eliminate the consequences of emergencies if government agencies do not make a timely decision to seize the property3.
It is interesting in this respect N. Taskin's point of view on Article 242 of the Criminal Code 4.
  According to the latter, the notion of “state bodies” used in the article implies the possibility of deprivation of property of a person in an administrative manner, վերլուծ from the analysis of the article one can conclude only that local self-government bodies are not authorized to make a decision on confiscation of property5.
Taking into account the existing legal regulation, we are inclined to the opinion that Article 31, Part 2 of the Constitution envisages the possibility of depriving a person of property only by a court decision.
  However, it should not be overlooked that the emergence of an emergency circumstance in itself requires the need to take immediate action, և in this case, the existence of problems with going to court is obvious.
  In the event of a requisition, the state of emergency may make it impossible to go to court6.
Let's imagine for a moment that there is a real danger of spreading the epidemic in Armenia, և if appropriate measures are not taken immediately, it can spread during the hours և endanger the lives of thousands of people.
  In this case, on the one hand, guarantees should be provided for the protection of the owner's rights, at the same time providing for procedures that ensure the timely and effective use of the requisition in emergencies without violating the proprietor's rights, otherwise the requisition becomes ineffective or ineffective.
Part 2 of Article 31 of the Constitution did not take into account the peculiarities of the application of requisition in this aspect.
 We think that in case of requisition, the right to take the property from the owner can be reserved to the RA Ministry of Health (Epidemics and Health 1 See Gadzhiev G., Constitutional Guarantees for Pre-Employment Activities, "Property and Law", 1995, N 8, p. 30.
2 See Kochura V., ъяъяъя им им им им ։щ։ у у со со со,,,,,,,,,,,,,։։։։։ яй։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
3 See Vinogradov O., pp. 88-89.
4 It should be noted that Article 285 of the RA Civil Code is a reproduction of Article 242 of the RF Civil Code.
5 See Taskin N.
6 See Karapetyan N., The requisition as a basis for the alienation of property for the needs of the society-state, "State-law", 2009, N 4 (46), p. 55.
in case of other circumstances related to the field of custody) ությանը to the RA Ministry of Emergency Situations (in case of natural disasters, accidents և similar other circumstances).
 Some authors consider it expedient to amend the article of the Constitution by rewording it. "No one may be deprived of property other than by a court decision, except in cases provided by law."
You. Tolstoy thinks that the article of the constitution should be formulated as follows: "By the decision of the J. Court, except for the cases provided by law.
 The decision on taking the property can be appealed in court. ”
  A. Manukyan thinks that the constitutional norm does not correspond to the economic conditions of the society, and the courts are ready to discuss all the disputes with such promptness2.
Provisions related to the requisition were also included in the RA Land Code (hereinafter referred to as the RA Land Code).
 RA land. According to Part 1 of Article 105 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, "In case of natural disasters, accidents, epidemics and other emergency circumstances, the land plot or part thereof may be taken from the owner by the decision of a state body on the condition of paying its value (requisition)" .
 RA land. "Accidents" are envisaged as an emergency circumstance (among other circumstances), in contrast to the RA civil law. Article 285 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the first part of which uses the term "technological accidents".
  That is, RA land. e.g., in contrast to RA For example, it is not limited to considering technological accidents as an emergency, but also considers other types of accidents as such.
  In this respect, a more comprehensive legal regulation is envisaged for the RA land. For example, not only technological accidents but also other types of accidents (for example, industrial, radiation, etc.) can be considered as an emergency.
  Taking into account the above, we think that the RA city. The words "technological accidents" in part 1 of Article 285 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia should be replaced by the word "accidents".
RA land. According to Part 3 of Article 105 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, “In the event that the circumstances referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article are met, in the absence of the need to requisition the land or part thereof, the land or part thereof may be used temporarily during those circumstances. for the needs of the state or communities, by compensating the damages related to the temporary restriction of the rights of the owner of that land. ”
 The existence of such a provision in the article aimed at regulating the requisition provided by the land legislation has given rise to various interpretations.
  Ս. According to Bogolyubov, the land legislation provides for two types of requisition: 1) the land can be temporarily taken from the owner to prevent dangerous consequences, վերադարձ later returned to the owner (for example, in other similar cases), 2) the land can be forcibly taken from the owner (or) to be replaced with an equivalent plot of land3.
1 See "Civil Law", textbook, vol. 1, in order. А. Сергеева, Ю. Tolstogo, 4th ed., Moscow, 2005, p. 368.
2 See the opinions of the mentioned authors, according to N. Karapetyan, p. 55.
3 See “Commentary on the Country Code of the Russian Federation”, ed. С. Боголюбова, Е. Mini, Moscow, 2002, available at http: // www.
//www.lawmix.ru/commlaw/1791.
Another group of lawyers considers that the temporary use of the land or part of it during the period of emergency circumstances, with compensation for damages related to the temporary restriction of the rights of the owner of the land, can not be considered an independent type of requisition.
  This view was expressed by N. Taskin, who thinks that in reality there are cases when there is a need not to take the land by force, but to use it temporarily without termination of property rights, for example, in order to preserve the useful properties of the land 1.
According to another view expressed in the literature, there is a clear discrepancy between the norms of the settlement of the requisition provided by the civil "land legislation", which can not be justified by the fact that the Land Code provides for a special legal regulation of land ownership2.
Analyzing the mentioned positions, we also think that RA. The use of the land or its part for the needs of the state or communities during the operation of circumstances of temporary nature provided for in Part 3 of Article 105 of the Code of Criminal Procedure may not be considered as a second type of requisition for the following reasons: RA land. From the analysis of Part 3 of Article 105 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, it follows that the land (or part of it) is taken temporarily for the use of the needs of the state or communities, while in case of requisition, the taking of the property is not limited to the possibility of its use.
2. The requisition is the basis for the termination of the property right, while the RA land. Part 3 of Article 105 of the Criminal Code clearly states that in this case it is not the termination of the property right, but its temporary restriction.
3. RA land. Part 3 of Article 105 of the Code of Criminal Procedure clearly emphasizes the fact that the land can be temporarily used for the needs of the state or communities in the absence of the need to requisition the land (or part of it).
In the case of the application of the requisition, the issue of legal regulation of the compensation given to the owner is of more fundamental importance.
 In the RA Civil Code, only part 1 of Article 285 is dedicated to this issue, which stipulates that the property can be taken from the owner only on the condition of paying its value, and part 2 of the same article stipulates that the owner can to challenge in court the amount of compensation for the forcibly taken property.
RA city. From the analysis of Part 1 of Article 285 of the Code of Criminal Procedure we can come to the following conclusion.1. When applying for a requisition, it is envisaged to provide the owner not only with initial, but also with further compensation.
2. The RA civil legislation does not specify that it is about "adequate compensation" given to the owner, as the legislation proposes only the requirement to pay the value of the property.
1 See Taskin N.
2 See Romadin M., Problems of application of requisitions of individual parts in the new Earth Codex, "Peace Rights", 2003, № 3, available at http: // www.
//uristy.ucoz.ru/publ/15-1-0-745.
In case of requisition, the possibility of providing not only initial, but also further compensation to the owner, prescribed by law, is dictated by objective necessity, as it is used in case of extraordinary circumstances, when it becomes difficult to provide initial compensation to the owner.
As for the demand to pay only the value of the property according to the RA legislation, we think that it is not in the interests of the owner, as providing compensation to the owner in the amount of the value of the property is not a sufficient guarantee for full protection of the latter's rights.
  In the case of compensation for property valuation, not only the need to compensate the person at the market value of the property should be taken into account, but also the need to compensate for damages incurred by the owner as a result of taking the relevant property.
In the case of confiscation of property, different views have been put forward by different authors on the legal regulation of compensation to the owner, which has mainly led to the conclusion that the application of the provisions of the legislation on requisition requires a special legal act or appropriate changes in civil law1.
RA city. According to Article 285, Part 3 of the Criminal Code, "A person whose property has been forcibly taken has the right to demand that the preserved property be returned to him, if the circumstances in connection with which the requisition has been made have disappeared."
 It should be noted that the RA city. Article 285 of the Code of Criminal Procedure lacks provisions on how issues related to compensation should be resolved in the event of a claim by the owner for the return of property.
Let's discuss the following possible options.1. The owner is given an initial compensation, և he later demands the return of the preserved property, 2. The owner is not given a preliminary compensation, the circumstances in connection with which the requisition was applied disappear, և the owner demands the return of the preserved property, 3. The owner is given further compensation At the same time, the property taken from the owner due to the application of the requisition is preserved, պահանջ a request is submitted by the owner to return it.
In the case of the third option, when the owner is given post-compensation, the latter should no longer have the right to demand the return of the preserved property, in other words, giving further compensation deprives the person of the opportunity to claim the property, taking into account, of course, the fact that the person has the right to claim. to compensate him / her for the damages he / she suffered during the use of the property (if any).
Ն. According to Karapetyan, receiving further compensation should deprive a person of the right to receive property in kind2.
1 See Maleina M., Requisites. Commentary on Article 242 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, "Journal of the Russian Federation", 2006, № 8, available at http: // www.
//www.juristlib.ru/book_3118.html.
2 See N. Karapetyan, page 59.
In the case of the first option, the owner is obliged to return the compensation given to him, offsetting the losses he has suffered (if any).
 Ն. Taskin considers M. fair. The view expressed by Masich that in case of return of the property to the owner, the latter should return the compensation given to him, taking into account the reduction of its value during the period of use of the property for the needs of the state 1.
  In this case, one should be guided by the general rules of voluntary enrichment of restitution (RA Civil Code, Article 1094) 2.
In the case of the second option, when the owner is to be provided with further compensation, but it has not been provided yet, the owner has the right to demand the return of the preserved property, to provide compensation for the damages he has suffered (if any).
  In case the compensation is not preliminary, the former owner has the right to demand it. Interests provided for in Article 411 of the Criminal Code3.
Another issue related to the legal regulation of compensations in case of application of the requisition is the issue of compensating the lost benefit.
According to some authors, filing a claim for lost benefit is legal only if the person has suffered damages in the case of requisition used in violation of the law4.
  A. According to Manukyan, the lost profit is subject to compensation in all cases5.
We agree with the opinion that the RA mouse. Article 17 of the Code of Criminal Procedure refers to compensation for damages caused by a violation of a right, ie it is emphasized that compensation for damages is applicable in case of any violation of civil law6.
The analysis of this work on the legal settlement of property confiscation relations shows that no legislative framework has yet been established for the settlement of claims related to the application of requisition, and the analysis of the existing reality shows that there are many gaps in legal regulation that are urgent. They need a solution.
1 See Taskin N.
2 See Karapetyan N., The principle of property inviolability in civil law, ed., Yerevan, 2010, pp. 154-155.
3 See ibid., Pp. 155-156.
4 See Taskin N.
5 See in the same place!
6 See Barseghyan T., The Evolution of the Institute of Property Liability և Current Issues, Yerevan, 2006, p. 149.
Shushanik Ghukasyan REVISION: FOUNDATION OF TERMINATION OF PROPERTY Keywords
