PROSPECTS FOR INCREASING YOUTH POLITICAL INVOLVEMENT IN ARMENIA Young people should have the opportunity to exercise their right to freedom of expression to the best of their ability,
 This knowledge and skills are necessary for coping with life problems.
We must strive to develop and implement programs that will support meaningful youth participation in the decision-making process at home, at school, and at the local and state levels.
The coordinated youth policy in the Republic of Armenia began to be realized after the proclamation of the independence of the Republic of Armenia.
 However, a practical step was taken in the field of public administration in 1995, when a Department of Youth Affairs was established within the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Youth Affairs of the Republic of Armenia.
  1998 Due to the structural changes made in the Ministry of Culture and Youth Affairs of the Republic of Armenia, a position of equal coordinator of youth issues was created.
 2002 The Department of Youth Affairs was reorganized into the Department of Youth Policy1.
  This change reflects more than 15 years of development and evolution from "youth issues" to "youth policy."
  The authorized body for the development and implementation of the RA state youth policy in 2007 The Ministry of Sport and Youth Affairs of the Republic of Armenia has been transferred to the position of the Deputy Minister for Coordination of the Youth Policy's staff since June 20122.
  The state youth policy of the Republic of Armenia is mainly implemented through state structures, non-governmental organizations and foundations.
1. Public sector: a) Government - organizations and bodies created by it: • Ministry of Sport and Youth Affairs of the Republic of Armenia, • Youth Council under the Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia, • Departments dealing with youth issues of RA marzpetarans, municipalities;
b) Committee on Education, Science, Culture, Youth and Sports of the National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia.
1 "National Youth Report of Armenia", Yerevan, 2007.
2 See ibid., P.
2. Socio-political sector: • Youth non-governmental organizations, • Student councils, • Student scientific societies, • Youth parties, • Youth unions, initiatives.
3. Departments of international organizations.
The private sector, various civil society institutions, the donor community, etc. can be mentioned as actors in youth policy.
RA Government 1998 The first document related to the spheres of youth state policy - "The concept of youth state policy" was approved by the decision No. 798 of December 14, 2006.
It is necessary to single out international donor-youth organizations from the international actors influencing the youth policy of the Republic of Armenia.
 At the European level, the Council of Europe's Directorate երիտասարդ։։։։։։։։,։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
  The Directorate provides educational and financial support to international youth initiatives aimed at encouraging young citizens, ensuring youth mobility, and promoting the values ​​of human rights, democracy and pluralism2.
 European youth actors include the European Youth Centers under the auspices of the Council of Europe երիտասարդ Youth և Sports Directorate, the European Youth Foundation, etc.
The agencies operating within the UN have a significant impact on youth policy in Armenia: the UN Children's Fund, the UN Population Fund, the UN Development Program.
  By adopting the 3 "World for Children" resolution concluding the session dedicated to children, the states have committed to activate the participation of young people.
 Other international organizations include youth in their priorities, such as the National Institute for Democracy (NDI), the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the German Technical Cooperation (GTZ), etc.4.
The goal of the state youth policy strategy is to improve the living conditions of young people, to increase their level of participation in public and political life.
  One of the goals of the strategy is to broaden the government's youth action in the context of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 1, National Youth Report of Armenia, 2007, pp. 20-21.
2 See www.youthforum.org.
3 “Resolution. A world fit for children ”, adopted by the UN General Assembly in 2002. October 11, see www.unicef.org.
4 Websites of international organizations in the relevant appendix.
Establish a framework in which the government will set their specific priorities for the coming years, in particular: a) improving access to services ծառայությունների information, b) participation in public and political life, c) ensuring youth employment, d) expanding human and institutional capacity and awareness of young people increase 1.
The state youth policy of the Republic of Armenia, which is one of the most important functions of the state, has a strategic importance.
 It is called to create legal-economic conditions and guarantees for the comprehensive development, self-affirmation, self-expression of the young generation, who are communicative of national and universal values, deeply aware of their responsibility to the homeland and the people.
Research has shown that it is possible to describe the process of developing participation by comparing youth groups with different school groups.
 That is why we can define the sequence of groups by classifying 13 to 18 year olds2.
Work is being done to implement the state youth policy, to develop a normative document on youth policy, to activate the activities of regional centers, to form their governing councils, to maintain and update the database of youth non-governmental organizations in the regions.
  The Ministry of Sport and Youth Affairs of the Republic of Armenia is developing and implementing the 2008-2012 state youth policy of the Republic of Armenia. Programs arising from the priorities of the 2009-2012 Action Plan to ensure the implementation of the strategy3.
  RA State Youth Policy 2008-2012 The priorities are: • Ensuring access to quality education in accordance with the aspirations, abilities and capacities of young people, • Employment, job creation, access to education, • Improving the socio-economic situation of young people,
Young people have serious problems with employment.
Those who do not have work experience և skills are often rejected by the employer.
  As a result of the study, the number of job seekers for the first time was 15,442, of which 2,128 were graduates of that year.
 Moreover, in 2011 The number of young unemployed has increased as a result of the introduction of the program "Organization of internships for unemployed disabled people who have a profession but are looking for a job with the employer" 5.
1 "National Youth Report of Armenia", 2007, page 22.
3 See www.msy.am.
4 See ibid.
5 See www.employment.am.
According to the survey, 48.7% of the employed young people aged 18 to 30 in Armenia, the unemployed - 18.7%, and the economically inactive sector - 32.6%.
  It is necessary to differentiate between the concepts of the number of unemployed and the level of unemployment.
 The first is the percentage of unemployed in the observed group of the population, and the second is the ratio of the number of unemployed in the given group of the population to the number of unemployed registered in the same group.
 It is obvious that the second is always greater than or equal to the first.
 The number of unemployed among the youth is higher than in other age groups of the Republic of Armenia 1.
  The unemployment rate among the youth was 27.8%, which is in the case when in 2011 in the republic. In September it was 20.7% 2.
TotalEconomically inactiveUnemployedNo-occupationChart 1. Distribution of employment status by age 31 According to 2011 According to a survey conducted by the IPSC Institute for Sociological and Political Consultations in September 2010, 15.1% of the population over the age of 18 in Armenia is unemployed.
2 See ibid.
3 See "Armenian National Youth Report", Yerevan, 2011, p. 41.
State youth policy is a state activity that aims to solve the specific problems of the youth, depending on what is considered a problem of the youth in the given society, how the boundaries and problems of the state management of social processes are determined, how much the age differentiation reflects the cultural tradition ասխանում corresponds to the values ​​and norms formed in the given society.
The state youth policy differs significantly "according to the concept" and the application of the methods of implementation in practice.
Initially, youth care in Europe was viewed as Christian assistance to the poor.
It gradually began to be perceived as part of the state policy of conflict resolution in the society.
  At the same time, a system for controlling the youth was created.
  Later, the ideas of care and control of the younger generation were integrated into the concept of youth assistance, and private initiative in this area began to be regulated by law1.
  The legal regulation was mainly aimed at reducing the scale of juvenile industrial injuries and preventing the growth of juvenile delinquency.
 In the early twentieth century, special courts for juveniles were formed in a number of countries (in 1908 in Germany, in 1910 in Russia, etc.), provisions were introduced in the legislation aimed at protecting the rights of young citizens, but the law did not encourage social activities of young people. Unsuitable and harmful for upbringing.
The concept of state youth policy was developed in the USSR Հայաստանում Soviet Armenia since the 1920s.
  V. was crucial for its formation. Lenin's speech at the 3rd Congress of the Russian Communist Party.
  The Comintern gained special authority to represent the youth and became the most important element of the state system for solving the problems of the youth.
 With the strengthening of the position of the Communist Party and the Communist Union in the society, the state mechanisms were weakened, and the state youth citizenship became an ideological auxiliary tool for the communist education of the youth.
Legislative enshrinement of individual youth rights in the 1990s It became a general phenomenon for the world practice (laws on social protection of the youth were adopted in Austria, Afghanistan, Greece, India, Spain, Italy, China, the Netherlands, Sweden, etc.).
 In many countries, state bodies for youth affairs have been established, national programs have been adopted.
  The state youth policy became the subject of a series of UN acts տարի events (International Year of Youth, 1985, Decade of the International Year of Youth, 1995, etc.) 2.
At present, the state youth policy differs to a certain extent in ensuring the rights of the youth 1 See www.mss.am.
2 See www.un.org.
on issues of role.
 The US concept is based on the minimal participation of state institutions in the socialization of youth.
 Another approach is available in the German youth survey by the EMNID survey, which shows a gradual increase in political interest: 27% of 15-18 year olds are interested in politics, 39% of 18-21 year olds, 46% of 21-25 year olds % is 1.
The model of state youth policy, which is typical of Sweden, Finland and a number of other countries, is based on the regulation of support measures by state special forces, youth and youth organizations.
The youth organizations created after the collapse of the USSR included a small part of the youth, they did not even have information about each other's existence.
  The organizations themselves naturally undertook a number of youth policy implementation functions without state, systematic, purposeful support.
  Youth organizations play a big role in activating the youth policy of the Republic of Armenia, being the most organized subject of the state youth policy.
  They should always be the bearer of the state youth policy հիմնական the main means of implementation.
 One of the main goals of the state youth policy should be to increase youth participation not only in Yerevan, but also in the regions of Armenia.
  The citizens of the Republic of Armenia, especially the youth, should have the opportunity to acquire and develop basic skills, to be able to research, solve problems, use information technologies, speak the mother tongue, be physically fit, energetic, free, responsible citizens, for whom preservation and development of national traditions are paramount. .
The participation of regional youth in politics should be promoted.
 Young people in the regions are more passive, they do not see themselves in the process of governing the country.
  The youth policy in the regions is implemented in the following directions: 1. Ensuring guarantees in the field of youth employment, employment, implementation of state personnel policy 2. Establishment of a local legal system ensuring youth activities 3. State support to young families, 4. Support to the activities of youth organizations, 5. Ensuring cooperation with young people from other countries, especially Diaspora Armenians, 6. Creating the necessary conditions for the care and physical development of the youth, their political and patriotic upbringing.
1990s During the transformation of Russian society, the issue of youth education left the field of education, the media began to pay less attention to patriotic education, leaving young people in a state of neglect.
  It soon became clear that this policy could not last long. The government began to take steps in that direction.
  2001 On February 16, the Russian government made a decision for 2001-2005. on the patriotic upbringing of the youth.
  2005 A document on youth policy for 2006-2010 appeared 1.
  Research has shown that the values ​​of Russian public life in the 21st century are family, friends, health, with which interesting work, money, justice (the perception of which is steadily growing among the youth) 2.
In the field of youth policy, it is necessary to ensure a balanced provision of the legitimate interests, rights and responsibilities of the state, local self-government bodies, society, citizens, young people.
In addition to structural changes, new state structures have been created for the implementation of the RA youth policy.
  By the decision of the Government of the Republic of Armenia No. 520 of June 11, the "Pan-Armenian International Youth Center" Foundation was established, the goal of which is the development of the cooperation of the republic, the Diaspora երիտասարդ foreign youth, the development and implementation of joint programs.
 The post of youth affairs specialist in the staff of the RA marzpetarans was practically created in 2004 by the assignment of the RA Prime Minister3.
Thus, the goal of youth policy is to create guarantees for the social development of a young person, the use of his creative potential for the benefit of society, social, legal, political, cultural and cultural conditions.
One of the most important guarantees for the success of democratization and civil society building processes in the Republic of Armenia is the participation of the youth.
 In recent years, active structures and mechanisms of the management system have been established: the Council for Youth Affairs under the Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia, and the RA Ministry of Sport and Youth Affairs has established an expert commission for grant programs.
 There are regional youth centers in the regions of the Republic of Armenia with the involvement of civil society representatives in their management system.
  The media provides complete information on the field via the Internet.
In the context of youth development, the Government has developed a wide range of reforms, according to which it is necessary to improve the living conditions of young people, increase their participation in public and political life, ensure their employment, access to services and information.
3 Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia 1997 According to the decision № 598 of December 8, 2007, it was envisaged to create a post of youth specialist in the staffs of the RA marzpetarans, see "National Youth Report of Armenia", 2007, p. 22.
Thus, the RA state youth policy is of strategic importance.
 It is called to create legal, socio-economic, socio-political conditions and guarantees for the comprehensive development and self-determination of the young generation, which communicates national and universal values, has a deep sense of responsibility towards the homeland and the people.
ARNAK SARGSYAN INCREASING POLITICAL INVOLVEMENT OF YOUTH IN RA Keywords: political involvement of the youth, youth.
