CRIMINAL GUARANTEES OF PROVIDING THE PRINCIPLE OF INADMISSIBILITY AGAIN (NON BIS IN IDEM) The principle of inadmissibility to try a person for the same crime a second time is as old as the principle itself.
  It is enshrined in the basic laws of the vast majority of states, as well as in a number of international treaties.
In accordance with Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter referred to as the Convention): "No one shall be held guilty of any penal offense on account of any act or omission which did not constitute a penal offense, under national or international law, at the time when it was committed."
According to Article 14, Clause 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. "No one shall be held guilty of any penal offense on account of any act or omission which did not constitute a penal offense, under national or international law, at the time when it was committed."
The discussed principle is enshrined in Article 22 of the RA Constitution, according to which part 7 of: "(...) No one can be tried again for the same act."
  It is also reflected in Articles 10-21 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code.
The principle of non bis in idem is a system of four negative responsibilities of the state, the elements of which are closely interdependent, their independence is only relative.
  These safeguards are the prohibitions against (a) punishing, (b) condemning, (c) judging, (d) prosecuting the same act separately2.
Referring to the content of the mentioned principle, the RA Court of Cassation expressed the following position. "The principle of non bis in idem is fundamental in the system of protection guaranteed by the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia և under international treaties, which is based on the presumption of atonement, which means not to prosecute the same person again for the same act." Guarantee of not condemning, not punishing.
 Moreover, the wording "for identification" means that double conviction is not permissible. 1 See Hunter J., Development of the Rule against Double Jeopardy, Journal of Legal History, 1984, 3-4.
2 See Comments on the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, edited by G. Harutyunyan, A. Vagharshyan, Yerevan, 2010, p. 272.
The object of extensibility should be understood not in terms of the legal qualification of the crime, but in terms of a factual description ”1.
It follows from the above that the principle under discussion presupposes the final cessation of criminal-criminal-legal relations arising in connection with a certain act of a person "state".
 Moreover, from the criminal procedure point of view, it is based on the idea of ​​ending the threat of criminal prosecution.
In order to ensure that, the RA Criminal Procedure Code envisages two grounds, which are a guarantee of the discussed principle, excluding the criminal case proceedings or criminal prosecution, which are defined by Article 35, Part 1, Clauses 7, 8 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code.
 According to the mentioned norms. «1. No criminal case may be instituted և criminal prosecution may not be instituted and the criminal proceedings instituted may be terminated if: (…) 7) a person has a legally binding conviction or other court decision confirming the impossibility of criminal prosecution.8 (a) there is a decision of the investigative body, the investigator վելու to refuse to prosecute a person on the same charge. (…).
It follows from the content of the above-mentioned norms that no criminal case can be initiated, no criminal prosecution can be carried out, and the criminal case proceedings are subject to termination if there is a case against the same person on the first ground: 1. guilty verdict (conviction), 2. acquittal (acquittal), 3. Judicial change confirming the impossibility of criminal prosecution.
And in the case of the second ground, the failure of the investigative body, the investigator or the prosecutor to refuse to carry out criminal prosecution.
The separation of the two grounds under discussion is conditioned by the differentiation of the stages of the trial: the first is applicable in the court proceedings (including cases of conviction, acquittal, acquittal and other cases), and the second is in the pre-trial proceedings in the final case.
According to Part 1 of Article 66 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code. "A person is acquitted against whom the criminal prosecution has been terminated or the criminal case has been terminated in accordance with points 1-3 of the first part of Article 35 of this Code, in the second part, on any grounds, a verdict of acquittal has been rendered against Kamor."
According to Part 2 of Article 366 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code. "The court is obliged to make a verdict of acquittal in the given court session in case of any of the grounds provided for in 1-3, paragraphs 1-3 of part 1 of this Code."
1 See the 2012 decision of the RA Court of Cassation on criminal case No. KD1 / 0043/01/11 on Davit Babayan Decision of June 8.
According to Part 1 of Article 22 of the same Code. "The acquitted has the right to restoration of his rights, including the material damage caused to him by the bodies conducting the criminal proceedings."
It follows from the content of the cited norms that the circumstances excluding the criminal case provided for in Article 35 1 1 և 2 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code or the circumstances excluding criminal prosecution may be justifying (rehabilitating), not justifying (not rehabilitating) due to the nature of their legal consequences. 1.
The grounds for justification (rehabilitation) include the grounds provided for in Article 35, Part 1, Clauses 1-3, և Part 2 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, the application of which in pre-trial proceedings leads to termination of criminal prosecution և (or) termination of criminal proceedings; and in court proceedings to make a judicial act of acquittal.
By their content, they presuppose the absence of a criminal act or the failure of a person to commit the act he is accused of (not proving the connection of the person).
  As a result, the person acquires the status of a acquitted person, which implies a number of rights reserved to him by law, including the right to receive compensation, to terminate the criminal proceedings or to terminate the criminal prosecution or to appeal the acquittal (other Article 66 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code). .
In case of making a decision on acquittal on grounds of justification (rehabilitation), termination of criminal proceedings or (or) termination of criminal prosecution, the court, the prosecutor, the investigator, the investigative body are obliged to explain the right to compensation to the acquitted (Article 67 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code).
Thus, in the presence of the grounds under discussion, the state accepts the fact that its criminal prosecution is not substantiated, and consequently the existence of an obligation to restore the violated rights of the person.
The grounds envisaged by the remaining points of Article 35 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code are non-justifying (non-rehabilitating) grounds.
 In case of termination of the criminal prosecution on those grounds or termination of the criminal case, as a rule, it is proved that the act committed by the person contains features of a crime, but the criminal prosecution against him / her is terminated by virtue of the conditions established by law.
 As a result, the legislator does not grant the person the status of a acquitted person, the right of post-rehabilitation.
It follows from the content of the principle of inadmissibility of retrial that the termination of criminal prosecution on its grounds դրա the termination of the criminal case should presuppose the absence of a criminal act, as the above classification of circumstances excluding criminal proceedings or criminal prosecution exists as in theory (Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Armenia).
 General part, Yerevan, 2010, as well as in practice (based on the application of citizens Aram Sargsyan և Karapet Rubinyan, Article 35, Part 2, Article 67, Part 3 of the Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia on determining the issue of compliance with the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia Decision No. SDO-871 of the Constitutional Court of 30.03.2010, Decision of the Court of Cassation of the Republic of Armenia of September 13, 2013 on criminal case No. EAKD / 0009/11/13, item 16).
In connection with the act constituting the criminal charge, the relevant legal relations between the person and the state have arisen, finally ceased, ie there is no "criminal act" in legal terms, therefore the criminal prosecution of the person by the state cannot be justified without any restriction of his rights.
It follows from the above that the grounds for termination of criminal prosecution aimed at the realization of the principle of inadmissibility of re-trial, termination of the criminal case must be endowed with features characteristic of rehabilitation grounds.
 Otherwise, a situation is possible when a person is acquitted for a specific act, then prosecuted in connection with the same act (which implies restriction of his basic rights), և it is terminated on unjustified grounds.
 It turns out that in connection with the identification of a person, there may be a judicial act of acquittal that has entered into force, a decision to terminate the criminal prosecution on non-justifying grounds, which we consider inadmissible.
However, according to the RA Criminal Procedure Code, the grounds for termination of criminal prosecution aimed at the realization of the principle of inadmissibility of trial again, termination of the criminal case are not defined among the grounds for rehabilitation, therefore they are non-rehabilitators.
It should be noted that, in addition to the above-mentioned inadmissible situations, such regulation also contradicts the requirements of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
According to the principles developed by the European Court of Human Rights. "(A) Based on the principle of assistance, the primary task of domestic authorities is to provide redress for alleged violations of the Convention.
 In this regard, the question of whether the applicant can claim the status of 'victim' of an alleged violation relates to all stages of proceedings under the Convention; (b) a decision or measure favorable to the applicant is not in principle sufficient to deprive him of his 'victim' status. have manifestly or unequivocally acknowledged a violation of the Convention; և provide further compensation; (c) the applicant's ability to be a 'victim' depends on the compensation afforded to him by domestic remedies; (d) the principle of assistance does not mean renouncing domestic remedies otherwise the rights guaranteed by the Convention will be deprived of their essence.
  In this connection, it must be reiterated that the purpose of the Convention is to guarantee, not theoretically or illusory, but practical "effective rights" 1.
In a number of cases, the European Court has upheld the position that the person loses the status of "victim" within the meaning of the Convention in violation of Article 4 of Protocol No. 7, when the State recognizes 1 See Mutatis mutandis Nikolova and Velichkova v. Bulgaria ”case of the Grand Chamber in 2008 March 20 judgment, appeal, No. 7888/03, point 49.
The fact of violation of the principle of inadmissibility of being tried again, terminates the second prosecution առաջարկում offers the person adequate compensation1.
It follows from the foregoing that a violation by the State of the principle of inadmissibility of retrial set forth in Article 4 արձանագր 1 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention shall be deemed to have ceased when the State: - acknowledges the violation of the principle of inadmissibility of retrial; Violation - provides the person with adequate compensation.
It follows from the content of the RA Criminal Procedure Code that, as a guarantee of the principle of inadmissibility of retrial, only the grounds for criminal prosecution or termination of criminal proceedings are envisaged on that basis, which are non-rehabilitation grounds for termination of criminal prosecution.
 Meanwhile, the prosecution of a person, regardless of its termination, already presupposes a violation of the principle of inadmissibility of being tried again.
 It should be noted that the cessation of the violation does not yet mean full protection or restoration of the violated right.
  And the RA legislation conditioned the right to demand compensation for the damages of the suspect or the accused by the fact of acquiring the status of acquitted.
Such a position was also expressed by the RA Constitutional Court on 30.03.2010. by decision No. SDO-871, according to which: "(...) In the pre-trial proceedings, the person acquires the status of a acquitted criminal. trial In case of termination of criminal prosecution on the grounds provided for in points 1-3, part 1 of Article 35 of the Criminal Code, and in case of a verdict of acquittal that has entered into force during the trial (Article 64 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code Part 3).
  Until then, there is no right to claim compensation for the damage caused to the suspect or accused, because he is not yet justified.
  A person may sue for compensation on the basis of Article 66 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code only after acquiring the status of a person acquitted on the grounds mentioned in it (...) ”2.
It follows from the above that in case of criminal prosecution of a person in violation of the principle of inadmissibility of retrial again, the RA legislation does not provide a person with a legal remedy to restore his violated right, as a result of which the right of a person deriving from the said principle becomes theoretical and illusory. .
Based on the above legal positions, we consider that in case of violation of the principle of inadmissibility of being tried again, in case of termination of criminal prosecution, the person should be given a fair 1 See “Zigarella v. Italy ”case in 2002 Decision of 3 October 2004 in Complaint No. 48154/99, Falkner v.Austria. Decision of September 30, Complaint No. 6072/02, “Sergey Zolotukhin v. Russia ”case in 2009. Judgment of February 9, complaint No. 14939/03, item 115.
2 See Citizens On the basis of Aram Sargsyan և Karapet Rubinyan's application, Article 35, Part 2, Article 67, Part 3 of the Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia, on determining the issue of compliance with the RA Constitution, RA Constitutional Court decision of 30.03.2010. Decision No. SDO-871, point 9.
Status with the right to receive compensation (rehabilitation) conditioned by it.
  Otherwise, the termination of the criminal prosecution will not lead to the elimination of the violation of the principle of inadmissibility of being tried again.
Controversy over the issue of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and the RA Criminal Procedure Code under discussion in accordance with Article 6 4 4 of the RA Constitution should be resolved in favor of the Convention, but after studying the RA case law it is 35% of the RA Criminal Procedure Code. The criminal prosecution under Articles 7 և 8 ի 1 of Part 1 is terminated without granting the person the status of acquitted1.
In this regard, an acceptable approach has been demonstrated by the draft of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code2 (hereinafter referred to as the Draft), in particular, Article 12, Part 1, Clauses 3 Նախ 4 of the Draft envisages as circumstances excluding criminal prosecution Article 35 of the current Code grounds equivalent to points 7 և 8 of the part, at the same time defined by part 2 of the same article: "In case of termination of the criminal prosecution on the grounds provided for in points 1-4 of part 1 of this article, the accused shall receive the right to request rehabilitation."
In fact, the draft eliminates the existing contradiction between the Convention and the RA Criminal Procedure Code, which is fully justified and meets international standards.
At the same time, the Draft envisages the regulation of the principle of inadmissibility of retrial, which is not available in the current Code.
  According to Article 25 6 6 of the draft: "If, when convicting a person, it turns out that an administrative or disciplinary measure equivalent to punishment has been applied to him for the same act, in case of imposing a sentence on him, it shall be abolished and taken into account when imposing a sentence." .
It follows that, according to the Draft, the imposition of an administrative or disciplinary measure equivalent to the punishment on a person does not preclude the initiation of criminal prosecution or criminal liability, but it is taken into account when imposing a sentence.
It should be noted that in a number of its judgments, the European Court has referred to the issue of the ratio of disciplinary, administrative and criminal liability in terms of the principle of retrial.
Thus, in the case of Engel և Others v. The Netherlands, the European Court held that (...) The Convention undoubtedly allows States to draw a line between criminal 'disciplinary proceedings' in the exercise of their ombudsman functions, as well as their delimitation, but: taking into account certain conditions.
The Convention gives states freedom of one of the rights 1 See, for example, the 2012 decision of the RA Court of Cassation in criminal case No. KD1 / 0043/01/11 on Davit Babayan. The decision of June 8.
2 by the Government of the Republic of Armenia in 2013 It was submitted to the RA National Assembly in November.
In defining any action or inaction that deviates from normal implementation as a crime.
  It is about the rights that are protected by the Convention.
 (...) If the Contracting States could, at their discretion, classify the offense as disciplinary, rather than criminal, or prosecute the perpetrator of a "mixed" offense at a disciplinary rather than criminal level, the basic provisions of Articles 6 և 7 would apply to their sovereign will.
Such an extension of jurisdiction may lead to incompatible results with the objectives and objectives of the Convention.
 Therefore, in accordance with Article 6 (...), the Court has the right to ensure that disciplinary proceedings do not in any way replace criminal proceedings1.
In the case of "Galstyan v. Armenia", the European Court announced its position. The Court considers that, in order to determine whether an offense is classified as "criminal" within the meaning of the Convention, it is first necessary to determine whether the provision establishing the offense is criminal in the legal system of the respondent State, and the "nature of the offense" must be taken into account. weight (…).
  In any case, the definition given in the domestic legal system is not decisive in the sense of Article 6; the nature of the offense in question is the most important factor (...).
  The Court notes that (...) the purpose of the sanction imposed on the applicant was merely punitive և preventive.
 Finally, with regard to the severity of the punishment, the Court finds that the use of deprivation of liberty as a punishment generally belongs to the criminal sphere, unless it is substantially harmful in its nature, scope or manner of execution (...).
 In the present case, the applicant had been deprived of his liberty for three days, during which time he had been detained.
 However, the maximum sentence that could be imposed was 15 days in prison.
 These observations are sufficient to establish that the act for which the applicant was accused could be classified as criminal (...) within the meaning of the Convention.
According to the judgment in Sergei Zolotukhin v. Russia, (…) The Court considers that Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 should be construed in such a way as to prohibit the prosecution of a second "crime" as it is based on the same facts or facts that are, in fact, similar.
  The guarantees set out in Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 are to be applied when a new charge is brought, when the initial acquittal or conviction has already acquired the force of res judicata.
  The material at this intersection undoubtedly includes the decision by which the first "punitive proceedings" were concluded, և the charges brought against the applicant in the new proceedings.
  As a rule, these documents must contain the factual circumstances of the crime for which the applicant has already been convicted, և the crime for which he has been charged.
 According to the court, such factual circumstances are sufficient as a starting point to clarify the question whether the facts of the two proceedings were similar or, in fact, identical.
1 See “Engel and others v. The Netherlands ”case, 1976 Judgment of June 8, complaint No. 5100 / 71,5101 / 71, 5102/71, 5354/72, 5370/72, item 81.
2 See “Galstyan v. Armenia ”case, 2007 Judgment of November 15, Complaint No. 26986/03, paragraphs 56-60.
The Court emphasizes that which parts of the new indictment cannot ultimately be upheld or rejected in further proceedings, as Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 provides safeguards against being charged or prosecuted in a new proceeding, rather than being sentenced a second time. or against the prohibition on acquittal (…).
  The Court reiterates that Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 does not restrict the right not to be charged twice չ not to stand trial (…).
 Article 7 of Protocol No. 7 applies even in cases where a person has been charged but has not been convicted.
  The Court reiterates that Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 provides for three different guarantees, stating that no one should be (a) charged, (b) charged or (c) convicted of the same offense1.
  It follows from the above legal positions that if an act within the meaning of the Convention is found to be "criminal", the person must be provided with all the guarantees guaranteed by the Convention for the investigation of such acts, including the guarantee that he will not be convicted again for the same act.
Based on the above, the RA Court of Cassation, fulfilling its mission of developing the law, adopted a position in line with the above-mentioned positions of the European Court. In the case of Babayan by the decision of 08.06.2012, noting. «(…) Although D. In any case, holding Babayan in disciplinary detention for 10 or 5 days, respectively, was applied as a disciplinary sanction, but the nature of the offense committed by him, as well as the nature and severity of the remedy, suggest that Article 6 of the Convention equates to "criminal to be convicted.
(…) Դ. Babayan, in fact, was subjected to disciplinary liability for the same act of voluntarily leaving the military unit, then he was charged with copying under Article 361, Part 1 of the RA Criminal Code, by which the Court of First Instance of September 27, 2011 he was found guilty and sentenced to one year in a disciplinary battalion.
  The criminal prosecution against D. Babayan under Article 361, Part 1 of the RA Criminal Code referred to the same act, with the same factual circumstances, for which he was subjected to disciplinary liability, which by its nature is equivalent to criminal liability for a criminal charge. to obey.
Based on the above, the Court of Cassation records that in this case there was a violation of Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention; D. Babayan was tried again for the same act.
  In other words, for leaving the military unit voluntarily, D. While Babayan was detained as a disciplinary measure, the principle of inadmissibility of being tried again was violated while prosecuting him for the same act. ”2
1 See “Sergey Zolotukhin v. Russia ”case in 2009. Judgment of February 9, Complaint No. 14939/03, items 107-122.
2 See ibid., Paragraphs 29-31.
In such circumstances, it may appear that the regulation provided for in the Draft is contrary to the Convention.
  It should be noted, however, that չ Շukina Լ Եվրոպ արանը Եվրոպ Եվրոպ է դատ Եվրոպ Եվրոպ Եվրոպ Եվրոպ Եվրոպ Եվրոպ Եվրոպ Եվրոպ Եվրոպ Եվրոպ Եվրոպ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ չ that the applicant's administrative liability can be eliminated by reopening the administrative proceedings (see also relevant domestic law) 1.
In the above-mentioned "Zolotukhin v. Russia" case, the European Court noted that the prohibition of retrial in the Russian legal system is limited to criminal justice.
  According to the Criminal Procedure Code, a previous conviction is not, in fact, a ground for terminating the criminal proceedings for the same administrative offense.
  In the same way, the Russian Constitution protects only the second conviction for the same "crime".
 It follows that, unlike in the Shchukina case, the Russian courts had no legal provisions at their disposal to avoid a retrial in the event that criminal proceedings are instituted against a defendant who has already been convicted or acquitted under the Code of Administrative Offenses.
  On this basis, the European Court has found a violation of Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention.
It should be noted that Article 301 of the Lithuanian Code of Administrative Offenses stipulates that if the decision by which a person has been declared administratively liable is annulled, the fine paid must be reimbursed (…) և other restrictions related to [administrative liability] must be should be declared invalid.
  And the Lithuanian General Hospital, in fact, by its decision mentioned the possibility of reopening the administrative trial.
 As the applicant had not applied for the reopening of the administrative proceedings, the European Court rejected the application on the ground that the applicant had not exhausted its domestic remedies.
It follows from the above that in assessing the violation of the principle of inadmissibility of retrial, in addition to the criminal nature of the act, the existence of a "final decision" on the conviction must also be assessed.
  In the conditions when the previous decision is not "final", there is an opportunity to appeal, to abolish the "conviction", the existence of a violation of the principle of re-trial can be assessed only if that opportunity is exhausted, in accordance with the above-mentioned criteria for "victim" status.
In the context of the above-mentioned legal analysis, considering the regulation envisaged by the Draft, we find that it, envisaging the abolition of disciplinary or administrative sanctions, և the punishment 1 See Ščiukina v. Lithuania ”case of the European Court in 2006 The decision of December 5, 19251/02.
The requirement to take into account when appointing, in essence, eliminates the fact that the person was previously "convicted", and as a compensation for excluding the status of "victim" provides for the registration of that measure when imposing a sentence.
  In fact, this regulation complies with the requirements of the Convention, but it is controversial for the following reasons: (a) The initiation of criminal proceedings against a de facto person already violates the principle of inadmissibility of retrial, and the abolition of administrative or disciplinary measures is registered only against the person when imposing a sentence.
  Therefore, the draft regulation is incomplete as it does not include cases where a person is acquitted as a result of criminal prosecution or the prosecution is terminated on unjustified grounds.
  In fact, in the remaining cases at the end of the criminal proceedings, the issue of elimination of the violation remains unresolved.
(b) There is no structure for eliminating disciplinary or administrative liability.
  Thus, a disciplinary or administrative sanction is applied to a person by the decision of the relevant body (administrative body, court) իս when a person is convicted of a criminal offense by a court, he / she has already served disciplinary or administrative responsibility, as the worms precede the prosecution are "short in nature".
It is behind the mentioned. When imposing a sentence, the abolition of the previous disciplinary measure can only be legal (de jure), because in fact (de facto) it is already over.
  And the abolition of the de jure measure of responsibility presupposes the abolition of the decision of the relevant appointed body.
  In such circumstances, the question arises whether the court administering criminal justice has the right to overturn a legally binding decision made by an administrative body or a court administering administrative justice within the framework of a criminal case, without the appeal of the person entitled to appeal.
  The answer to the question mentioned within the framework of the principles of "judicial logic" as well as legal certainty in the Republic of Armenia is negative.
Based on the above, we believe that the issue under discussion can be resolved through a comprehensive legislative regulation.
  Within the framework of the RA Criminal Procedure Code, it is necessary to envisage a norm, according to which in any case of termination of criminal prosecution, the body conducting the proceedings must record the fact of violation of the inadmissibility of retrial in cases when criminal prosecution has been carried out against the person for the same act. has already been subjected to a disciplinary or administrative measure equivalent to the punishment.
Accordingly, in case the criminal prosecution ends with the conviction of a person, the legal acts regulating the issues related to disciplinary or administrative liability should provide norms according to which the confirmation of the fact of violation of the inadmissibility of retrial by the prosecuting body is a basis (as a new circumstance). to review the decision to prosecute.
  As a result of the latter, the issue of cancellation of the relevant decision, as well as in other cases of termination of criminal prosecution, the issue of compensation of a person can be resolved within the framework of the institute of damage provided by the civil legislation.
  However, it is also necessary to provide indemnification for both real and moral damages in case of violation of the decision on imposing disciplinary or administrative liability on the grounds of violation of the principle of inadmissibility of retrial, as well as in case of violation of the principle of criminal proceedings.
Ani Danielyan CRIMINAL GUARANTEES OF ENSURING THE PRINCIPLE OF NON BIS IN IDEM AGAINST CONTINUOUS (Responsible) , disciplinary liability, damages.
