ASSESSMENT OF THE ACTIVITY OF THE WIDTH ZONE BY THE EXAMPLE OF THE VEDI TURKEY The Republic of Armenia is in a tectonic active zone.
 Active faults are an integral part of tectonic structures.
  The faults that have been active for the last 10 thousand are considered active for the territory of the Republic of Armenia. During the year.
  As a result of the dynamics of active faults, earthquakes occur, which are often devastating.
Seismic activity is possible along the entire width of the active fault, so the correct estimation of the width will help to avoid human-material losses.
  Thus, it is very important to determine the width of the active fault zone when assessing seismic risk.
 Active faults, which have great potential, can cause cracks on the earth's surface.
In this work, based on the example of Vedic mobility վր based on the results of geological and geophysical studies, it is possible to determine mobility հնարավոր capable fault on the earth's surface (capable fault).
The territory of the Republic of Armenia in general, և in particular the central part, where the Vedi movement is located, is characterized by a complex mosaic-block structure.
  Sedimentary volcanic rocks, rich in organic fossils, are common in the Vedic belt. They are favorable for stratigraphic study.
 They are part of the geological structure from Late Proterozoic-Early Cambrian to anthropogenic rocks, which are expressed in metamorphic, volcanic, volcanic-sedimentary-sedimentary rocks.
  The stratigraphic complex of the site consists of Proterozoic, Paleozoic, chalk, Paliogenic, Neogene Quaternary rocks.
  From the point of view of tectonism, the above-mentioned layers have a different structure. In one part the Lower Proterozoic Neogene-Quaternary structures prevail, in the other Paleozoic ավիճ Chalk-Paleogene-height structures.
2010-2011 Studies were carried out by JICA և NAS YAGI, during which a trench was opened in the north of Nor Ughi village (Fig. 1b).
  As a result of the excavations in the trench, a displacement zone was discovered, where the Eocene-type rocks moved on the Quaternary rocks.
Figure 1 shows the trench location (a) և description (b) opened in the north of Nor Ughi village.
a B Figure 1. Location of the trench opened in the north of Nor Ughi village, Ararat region, RA (a) ագիրը Description (b) 2012-2014. Studies by the YEG of the National Academy of Sciences continued in the Vedi area.
  The detailed geological-geomorphological-geophysical analysis is aimed at revealing the segments on which there are traces of young activation.
 These works were carried out for seismic hazard assessment.
  For this purpose, georadaric extraction was used to reveal the violation zones in the sub-surface layers.
The US SIR3000 georadar was used in geophysical surveys using antennas with a frequency of 1000 MHz և 200 MHz, which allowed to study the geological section up to 30 m deep.
 The research was carried out in the north-northeast direction from Sisavan village, the length of the geophysical profile was 300 m (Fig. 2).
Figure 2. Trajectory of georadar extraction (shown in yellow) in parallel 1.
The profile built on a topographic scale on a scale of 10,000 was georadically excavated with the aim of revealing the violation zones in the possible sub-surface layers by means of repeating profiles.
Figure 3 shows the fault zone found during the georadural extraction results of our research.
 The zones of supposed violation are depicted with dots.
2012-2014 As a result of the geological-geological-geophysical studies carried out in the southern direction of the Vedi earthquake zone, two unexplained fractures were found on the surface.
Comparing with the previous works, a profile was formed, where the zones of movement are expressed (Fig. 4), the third of which was confirmed as a result of geophysical research.
Figure 3. Georadic extraction with AB profilePicture 4. Geological section of Vedi shifting according to AB profileFigure 5. The final image of the width and width of Vedi shifting as a result of the study Conclusion.
  Investigations revealed two fractures in the southern part of the Vedi fault.
Confirming that there are at least four eruption zones in our precinct, where the limestone rocks were eroded on the Eocene-sized rocks, Eocene renamed the quaternary rocks (Fig. 5).
 The following can be mentioned in particular.1. Vedi movement is rejuvenating in the south, 2. Vedi fault is active և has seismic potential, 3. It is a fault capable of causing a superficial tear (4). The studied zone of movement is at least 2.5 km wide.
Literature 1. Avanesyan M., Geological-structural features of Yerjan-Vedu graben-synclinorium, Dissertation, 2004.
2. Seismic risk assessment and management planning program in the Republic of Armenia (JICA NAS YGI, 2010-2011).
Hayk Igityan ASSESSMENT OF THE ACTIVITY OF THE ACTIVE FRACTION ZONE BY THE EXAMPLE OF VEDIA Keywords: fault, geological radar, seismic hazard, tidal zone.
