CHANGES IN THE CONDITION OF EFFECT OF MYCOTOXINS ON THE NUMBER OF BICOLOR HEPATICS IN RAT EYE INTRODUCTION.
 Toxic chemicals, mycotoxins, produced as a result of the fungal activity of fungi, appearing in different parts of the food chain, pose a serious danger to humans and farm animals.
 At present, there is a great deal of evidence that food of plant and animal origin contaminated with these substances may lead to the development of various diseases of humans and animals, reducing the productivity of pets.
 Even when small amounts fall into the human or animal body, they are not excreted but accumulate in various tissues (Huwig et al., 2001; Fodor et al., 2006).
  The study of the issue at hand is of great importance in connection with the lack of public awareness of the scientific basis for the deterioration of ecological conditions (Huwig et al., 2001; Alwakeel, 2009).
 In view of the above, our studies are aimed at studying the morphofunctional changes that occur in the liver of rats under the influence of mycotoxins.
Working material և methods.
 150-200 g of body material was used for the work. Liver of 40 rats weighing mycotoxins: aflatoxin B1, ochratoxin A և zearalenone.
  The experimental animals were divided into groups, which differed from each other according to the experiments մի mycotoxins imported with food (Table 1).
Table 1. Pordzakendanineri division khmberiMikotoksinnerePordzi tevoghutyuneKendanineri tiveStugichAflatoksin B1 Ochratoxin A ZearalenonAflatoksin B1, ochratoxin A, Zearalenon 15 days, 1 month, 2 months, 15 days, 1 month, 2 months, 15 days, 1 month, 2 months and 15 days 1 month 2 month the first batch pordzakendaninere food gets every day einaflatoksin B1 (0,0257 mg), and second, ochratoxin A ( 0.0064 mg), the third - zearalenone (0.0128 mg), and in the fourth series the animals were given a mixture of these mycotoxins daily with feed.
 The liver of 5 rats that did not eat food was used as a control.
 At the end of the experiments, under general anesthesia, the animals were weighed and killed by beheading.
 Stamps were made from the liver, which were subjected to sex, stained with hematoxylin-eosin.
 Under the microscope connected to the computer, the relative number of two-nucleated cells was calculated in the liver of all control and experimental animals.
  In the liver of each animal, 1000 cells were counted երկ the amphibians contained in them.
  The obtained numerical data were processed by statistical methods by determining the mean values ​​of the criteria (M) և average errors (m).
The accuracy of the differences between the values ​​obtained in the experimental "test materials" was determined using the Student's table.
The results of the work.
 It should be noted that in the last period of the experiment, 2-3 days before the end of the experiment, a decrease in the group of animals receiving aflatoxin was observed.
  None of them lived until the 60th day.
  We attribute it to poisoning.
 As for the results of 15- և 30-day experiments, it can be said that the number of double-celled cells in the liver of these animals is reduced.
  However, the difference compared to the checker is not statistically reliable (Table 2).
Changes in the number of double-celled cells in rat liver with food with daily intake of aflatoxin B1 Table 2. Experiment Test Number of double-celled hepatocytes, ‰ (M  m) Control 15 days 30 days The same can be said for changes in the liver of two groups of animals in the liver. ստացել They received zearalenone for 60 days (Table 3).
 In this case, despite some decrease in the indicator under study, the observed difference compared to the controller does not reach a statistically significant degree.
Table 3. Changes in the number of double-celled cells in rat liver with daily intake of zearalenone with feed. Number of double-celled hepatocytes, ‰ (M  m) Test duration Checking 15 days 30 days 60 days Each day in ocratox A test results in the number of animal studies in all cells about the reduction of reliable data.
  It is possible to assume that double-celled cells served as a material for the formation of polyploid cells.
 This is done as follows: A cell with two diploid nuclei produces two tetraploid cells instead of two diploid nuclei during mitotic division (Table 4).
Table 4. Changes in the number of double-celled cells in rat liver with daily intake of ochratoxin A feed. Number of double-celled hepatocytes, ‰ (M Փորձ m) Experience duration: 15 days 30 days 60 days Thus, the decrease in the number of double-celled hepatocytes indicates a decrease in the number of single-celled cells. Adaptive changes include activation of hepatocyte proliferative activity.
Examination of the material taken from the mixture of these mycotoxins in all three periods of the experiment showed that the number of amphibians in the liver of the experimental animals was statistically significantly reduced from day 15 until the end of the experiment (Table 5).
Table 5. Changes in the number of double-celled cells in the liver of rats with daily intake of a mixture of aflatoxin B1, ochratoxin և zearalenone. Number of double-celled hepatocytes, և (M Փորձ m) Test duration indicated within 15 days 60 days 60 days 30 days 60 days The decrease in the number reflects the increase in the proliferative activity of hepatocytes (Fig. 2).
Figure 2. Changes in the number of bivalve cells in rat liver during daily administration of a mixture of aflatoxin B1, ochratoxin ե zearalenone.
In view of the above, we conclude that the activation of cell proliferative activity, which is evidenced by the decrease in the number of double-celled cells, indicates the presence of regenerative processes accompanying the retrograde pathological phenomena of the liver due to the effects of mycotoxins.
050100150 Controller 153060 AflatoxinOchratoxinZaeralenoneCombinant Literature Hasmik Hakobyan, Anna Karapetyan
.
