NAREKATSI-MEGHARENTS LITERARY RELATIONS The problem of covering the existing literary connections and literary kinship between the writers of the most important subjects of modern literary studies, which pushes the researcher to the path of new searches and modern analytical views on the history of literature.
What is the source of this literary connection? Where should we look for the source of the formation of literary schools and intersections? For "scientifically accurate" harmonious analysis, we believe that one should study, clarify the role of this writer in the history of literature, understand what news What did the author take from his predecessors, and most importantly, what is the trajectory he left on the literary highway, what was the beginning of his further literary achievements?
 Here, while searching for the answers to those questions, the Narekatsi-Metsarents connection comes before our eyes, which is first of all the brilliant manifestation of the same human, poetic thinking, humanism, God-given genius in us.
We are not at all inclined to the idea that the Narek school was "unbuilt" before M. Metsarents, moreover, we are sure that during about a thousand years the lessons of that school have been enriched by dozens of talented poets, and through the latter, they have reached M. Metsarents, conquering literary heights.
 This poetic thinking presupposes the discovery of impersonal happiness, humanitarian aspirations, poetry inspired by nature, a certain identification of the individual poet և all mankind, even a direct word addressed to the Heavenly Lord, some symbolic images (which, by the way, are not reserved) the scholar to call them symbolic poets), consonant և consonant, poetic king lines և etc., besides these, he և M. Exclusive connection ներում inspired by Metsarents in literary and literary articles Մ inspiration to Grigor Narekatsi, who, M. In addition to being the greatest source of inspiration for Metsarents, he was a true teacher of aesthetics.
It is noteworthy that M. Many authors who preceded Metsarents rightly rebelled against the opinion that Grigor Narekatsi was an ordinary religious man.
 Of course, it is difficult to disagree with the idea that Grigor Narekatsi wrote a prayer book, but it is obvious that this prayer book is full of vitality, poetic thinking, full of fresh and attractive images, it fully deserves the title of "literary work", moreover, L. Shant, based on some parts of the "Book", rightly made a bold publication, where he proves that "Narek", to put it mildly, prays, at least by the standards of the classical prayer of the Armenian Apostolic Church, writing about it. "And finally, what is this prayer when you turn to your beloved and worshiped God and say: "You kept all the lofty and high positions and honors for yourself, you imposed the ugliest and hardest things and gave them to me, you kept all the precious rights to yourself and gave me the hesitant responsibilities."
 This is no longer a prayer and praise. This is already a war, demanding human rights. ”1
 It should be noted that one of the best commentators of Grigor Narekatsi, Arshak Chopanyan, stood on this idea, who, according to the literary giant of the tenth century, gave a very high scientific assessment worthy of the latter, in particular, writes: "Let us take it out of the religious color of the praying writer, where it was limited, and put it in the airy height of the great literary geniuses. Not to mention that our poetry does not have a giant.
 "Together with Homer and the Bible, let our sons touch him and teach them to marvel at that greatness."
 If we pay attention to the views of our famous analysts, we will see that almost all of them highly appreciated the pictorial-grammatical systems created by Narekatsi, in their deep conviction, Grigor Narekatsi is the height of Armenian poetry, a literary innovator from whom one can constantly learn.
 But M. In the case of Metsarents, there are much deeper literary ties with Grigor Narekatsi, which were revealed not only in literary articles and studies, but also in M. In the artistic images, utterances and consonants composed by Metsarents, which prove that M. Metsarents studied best with Grigor Narekatsudaser, more precisely, M. Metsarents, besides being one of the best commentators of Grigor Narekatsi, is also his worthy successor with his role and significance in Armenian poetry.
  For comparison, let us say that, for example, Paruyr Sjak, writing a valuable literary article about Grigor Narekatsi, translating his works into modern Armenian, deeply understanding and highly appreciating the role of Grigor Narekatsi in nationalism, nevertheless in his poetry has no literary relations with Grigor Narekatsi. Near Metsarents.
 Yes, genius P. Siak, who wrote about Grigor Narekatsi in particular, that "Only with a few poems of his own Narekatsi would become our first great poet.
  But he also created his "Book", which is the Akhtamara monastery of our poetry, with the only difference that "The Book" is indestructible for sure "3, nevertheless he did not show in his poetry a literary kinship addressed to Grigor Narekatsi with which he could stand. Next to Metsarents, Siamanto.
 The mentioned fact proves that it would be naive to say that only M. is enough to study the literary relations between Narekatsi and Metsarents. The article "With Narekatsi" by Metsarents, therefore, we will discuss the connection of these authors in the wide range of the above-mentioned other articles, as well as in the works created by the authors.
Մ. Metsarents Narekatsi commentator.
  1908 The article "With Narekatsi" published in "Luys" on January 19, 2009 by M. Metsarents begins with mysterious images (the white curtains of my cell tremble or at first 1 Shant L., Yerker, h. 9, Beirut, 1946, p. 117.
2 Chopanyan A., Works, Yerevan, 1988, p. 321.
3 Siag P., Works, vol. 3, Yerevan, 1983, page 64.
a longing, a voice faded with fear, a distant voice of eternity, as if mixed with the eerie sound of the wind, then separated from it, is left in my soul), which seem to prepare the reader for the interpretation of a great, divine mystery.
 That divine mystery is Grigor Narekatsi, the passport of the Armenian artistic thought to the world.
  Մ. In the poem "Book of Tragedy" Metsarentsi was apparently captivated by the great humanism and the abundant flow of unfettered thoughts, the desire to strive for divine perfection, to see man on two legs, with a straight back, which was so dear to M. To Metsarents.
 In addition, there was another possible circumstance. M. who could not recover with the help of drugs and various treatments. Metsarents fully hoped for "Narek", which is a real beacon for sick souls.
 Մ. Toros Azatyan, one of the first biographers of Metsarents, writes that according to his contemporaries, M. Metsarents always had Grigor Narekatsi's "Book" with him, this poetic outburst was not absent from his pillow.
  It is appropriate to remember P. However, even with this example, the claim proved to be true, being the most widely published book in our ancient literature, the most popular among the Armenian people, being called simply "Narek" instead of its many titles, this extraordinary, unfortunate volume of the poem has not been read much. որքան how much to kiss, put not so much on the shelf or pen, as on the hospital bed or under the pillow…. The Armenian people immortalized this great man as extraordinary as that great man himself. His book has been considered a MIRACLE for centuries, and the centuries have proved that it is truly a miracle. ”1
Մ. Metsarents manages to penetrate into the essence of "Narek", to conquer Narek, corners that are difficult for people to understand, to see the light, the ray that "slides deep into the soul to tap into the ruin of broken dreams." It was Metsarents who appreciated the "pictorial accuracy" of Grigor Narekatsi's paintings, moreover, he proved the existence of the unity and harmony of the content, the harmony, which is so immature to many in literature.
Comparing the "Book" with the waves, M. Metsarents discovers unique images, characters, the existence of which gives a special charm to the poem.
  It is first of all about the suffering individual, to whom M. Metsarents compares it with a boat in a stormy sea, notices the obvious resemblance of a drowning person, the illuminated soul of a suffering person, the aspiration towards the perfection, the perfect and the lasting, that is, the poet is able to see "Narek" otherwise it was not possible to make a true analysis of both art and science.
 If for some scholars the "Book" is an ordinary prayer book, for the more diligent scholars a higher poetic achievement, then M. For Metsarents, it is, first of all, a vivid example of the greatest outburst of emotions, the human-God dialogue, which the young genius, who had already taken the path of death, needed so much.
The riot that M. saw. Metsarents in the pages of the "Book" proves his mental anguish, inner turmoil, that is for life, for living 1Sak P., p. 64.
It is the evidence of the forced internal struggle for survival.
  We have already said above that some scholars have noticed the lines of debate of Grigor Narekatsi addressed to God, which are said from the position of universal humanism.
Of course, such thoughts pervaded him! Metsarentsi, so it was my fault that the "riot" and "storm" in "Narek" was so visible from his position.
In one sentence, M. Metsarents, as if he had become a unique "tabernacle of conscience", comes to stand before God next to Grigor Narekatsi, who considers himself the deputy of humanity, as Narekatsi's deputy before all mankind.
Grigor Narekatsi's deposits M. In the poetry of Metsarents.
  When we take an analytical look at Armenian literature, Armenian poetry, we unconditionally notice the dominant influence of the great literary innovator, the genius of the tenth century, the greatest source of nutrition of Armenian literature, Grigor Narekatsi, and his literary allegiance to Grigor Narekatsi.
 The eloquent proof of the said is the genius of Armenian classical poetry. Inspired by Grigor Narekatsi, who passed his literary school, the classics containing Narekatsi stand out with their unique poetic thinking, splendor of speech, regular use of rhyming poetry,'s phoneme.
  Such are Shnorhali և Yerznkatsi, Tumanyan and Isahakyan, Charents and Teryan, Varuzhan and Siamanto, such was Misak Metsarents.
We have already mentioned that the Narekatsi-Metsarents connection is not limited only to the above-mentioned article.
  To find out the role of Grigor Narekatsi M. In Metsarents's lyric poetry, it is enough to study only one of his debate articles, entitled "Backward Carnival", where the genius lyricist, defending himself against Paylak's vulgar and anti-scientific criticism, rightly notes that his vocabulary, which was severely criticized by Paylak's new I was not a stranger to lyric poetry. It was first of all the products of Grigor Narekatsi's linguistic thinking.
  "It can be seen that the words that Paylak allegedly condemned are tasteless and are mostly used in ancient literature. The abundance of the same words makes the "beautiful" gentleman say that. The evening, page 56, is a masterpiece of ugly, tasteless messy words "1.
Մ. Metsarents does not deny at all that he had Grigor Narekatsi in mind when creating, the words and style he uses are purely Armenian, national, writing about it in particular. "If Paylak Narekatsi had known this disagreement, he might not have ridiculed me, that he has no ambition to be something wonderful, but he has the dignity to protest against the tasteless qualification" 2.
Given this very comment, we must analyze M. The world of aesthetic images of the great poet. They already come to prove that the system of artistic images of Metsarentsi, the particularity (particularly the accumulations of Gs) reveal a close hand to Narekatsi's poetic world.
 Let's remember M. Metsarents' poem "Sparks", the artistic solutions of which are obviously related to the writing style of Grigor Narekatsi.1 Metsarents M., Yerker, Yerchan, 1986, p. 199.
2 Ibid., P.
My soul is full of laughter and drums. Laughter comes down tonight. My children rejoice like applause.
In addition, we can bring many other poetic lines, which are full of examples of the above-mentioned consonant: the twinkling flower of light that sprouts from the shining beacon ("Tsaygankar"), the shower full of dew ("The twig is bright"), the smoke of a flower ("Incense Tears"), Blue fringes, a rainbow, squeaky sounds, a mystical rose ("Sunday"), In the smell of the extreme flowers of the extremities ("Evening"), It claps, laughter sprouts "apricot" on its cheek ), The night is sweet, the night is easy ("Love Song").
You inadvertently remember M. The retelling of Metsarents about Grigor Narekatsi. "He knew how to make the words smile funny."
As for the Metsarentsi pictorial system, which is evident in the aesthetic images created by Grigor Narekatsi's brilliant wording, it must be said that at one time the critics rightly noted that "At a time when many admired Verlaine as a" famous innovator " In front of the eyes of our poets, the huge image of Narekatsi rises to his full height.
 Our leading poets could not help but notice that the "news" (especially the music of the poem) brought to the world of poetry by the much-praised Verlens many centuries ago had already been discovered by Grigor Narekatsi և not only rediscovered but also created a rich, healthy (not like them) series. classical poetic samples ”1, thus proving once again that M. Those who accuse Metsarents of bringing foreignness and foreign-born images of Armenian literature were at least unaware of Narekatsi's works, their "literary critical views" do not exceed the threshold of nonsense.
Մ. One of the brilliant proofs of the literary pleas he had with Metsarents, Grigor Narekatsi, is the humanism, the humanism that bridges the two millennia of Armenian literature again.
  Մ. Metsarents' poems, which have a humanitarian orientation, are, of course, one of Grigor Narekatsi's lessons. After all, the literary giant of the tenth century shone with humanity, the poet who summed up the sins of all mankind in himself, who considered himself the deputy of the world before God, served as an example of humanism to humanity, which ten decades later is alive for literary workers.
Deepening the expression of humanitarian issues, we will not be mistaken if we say that the greatest of the results of the poetic thinking used in Grigor Narekatsi's "Book" is the art of speaking directly to God, saying words "from the heart".
  We can find few poets who, through their works, have opened their mouths to God through their works, simply addressing the Heavenly Lord with a specific saying: "Give me, Lord, joy impersonal," begs Metsarents, who has many personal problems, an exceptional example of humanity. is 1 Mkryan M., Works, h. 2, Yerevan, 1988, page 28.
for all mankind.
  We find such exceptional examples of humanism especially in the poems "Evening", "Hugh" և "The Wind", but the peak of Metsarents humanism, in our opinion, is the work "Give me, Lord", which is entitled "OUR HUMAN FATHER" .
Regarding this poem, M. The best valued works of Metsarents's academy. H. Tamrazyan wrote surprisingly. "The one who understands understands that this 'prayer' is just a metaphor, it is only connected with the 'Lord's Prayer', which speaks of daily bread, forgiveness of debts and sins" 1, which, in our deep conviction, is a bit of a point of contention, because A brilliant M. with such a powerful artistic thinking. Metsarents could not write about any kind of connection to the event.
  It is true that in the same article H. Tamrazyan, understanding the spirit of the poem, writes that "in the dream of impersonal joy, in this modern prayer (emphasis added" they are ours - H. H.) the love spreads ".
  E. Jrbashyan, a researcher who has made a serious contribution to the study of Metsarents, seems to have been able to reach the ideological depth of the poem, so we completely agree with the assertion. Aspirations should not take place in abstract religious aspirations և traditional prayers, but in bright and unfettered humanitarian ideals ”2 (emphasis added - H. H.).
Today, freed from the influence of Soviet ideology, we confidently express the idea that this poem is a revision of the classical Lord's Prayer from the point of view of modern man, who has best understood the spirit of the time, the ways and means of facing modern challenges.
 This does not imply a negative attitude towards the Christian doctrine (by the way, the poem is dedicated to Bishop Duryan), but first of all a poetic thinking that is able to serve as an example of humanism, self-sacrifice for the great praying Grigor Narekatsi and his descendants. New approaches and modern solutions were needed.
  More specifically, the citizen of the twentieth century, free from various religious and ecclesiastical constraints, takes a bold look at the ways to solve the daily problems of his contemporaries.
 One possible circumstance. This poem was written in 1908. January 1, that is, a few days before the article "With Narekatsi", which proves that M. Metsarents at that time, more than ever, was really obsessed with Christian ideas.
  The article and the poem were born from the same feelings and emotions.
Yes, indeed appealing to the Lord of Heaven with an offer such as "And let us owe ourselves as we owe our debtors" gave birth in the twentieth century to his humanitarian, human-poetic supplication to God, which is much more encouraging. can be for a true Christian who has studied the Bible lessons.1 Tamrazyan H., The Millennium Mystery of Poetry, Yerevan, 1986, p. 286.
2 Jrbashyan E., Misak Metsarents, Yerevan, 1977, p. 116.
Give me, Lord, the joy impersonal, And lest I mourn and mourn the voice of others in the waterfall.
And one last feature, without which the study dedicated to the Narekatsi-Metsarentsgar clan would not be complete. It refers to superstitious poetry.
  It is obvious that for Grigor Narekatsi nature was the greatest source of inspiration, the largest database of artistic pictorial system, as especially in the poems the images of nature are the pillar on which Grigor Narekatsi was able to raise literary values.
 The most striking example of what has been said is "Vardavar's song". Gohar rose brightly from the lofty hair to the harp.
A sea flower flowed from his hair.
The color of that flower was bubbling in the sea, The fruit was shining in the branch.
Couldn't this be the greatest source of inspiration for M.? For the creation of Metsarents's ecological poetry… In any case, especially the poem "Under the Shine of the Acacias" with its aesthetic perfection is very reminiscent of the above-mentioned poem by Grigor Narekatsi.
Acacias, light and hot with wine, They sway and breathe a clean breath. Before the flower sniffs their scent, which hurries to embrace the wind.
Here, of course, we can not ignore the fact that Grigor Narekatsi is a mystical poet, that is, his ultimate goal is to achieve աստ-assimilated greatness, and God, in his deep conviction, is in all origins of the world, in all phenomena, therefore in nature, to sing. nature means praising God. Grigor Narekatsi created allegorical songs of nature.
  M. is different. In the case of Metsarents. The young genius seeks in the virgin nature the real beauty, which has remained pure, that is, has not distorted the divine creation.
  These were the pure images that M. Metsarents was given the strength to live, to "create", to protect himself from the enemies who were constantly persecuting him, it was that eternally new nature that reminded the poet, who received many blows from life, of his rural birthplace, the cheerful and happy days of life.
 Metsarents, who made nature the basis of poetry, explained with the most genius the difference of a real poet from various literary mediocrities. "The poet must be the reflection of nature. that he is not really a poet. The striped ones must have the vibration of the lord, the chirping of the bird, the sound of the people, the constant power of the field and the mountain.
 The voice of the creator must be the string of a cosmic relativity, with the combined vibration of the universes. ”1
 Such a perception of poetry is truly an exceptional phenomenon in the hands of literary thought of all times.
Hayk HovhannisyanNAREKATSI-MEGHARENTS LITERARY RELATIONS Keywords: Grigor Narekatsi, M. Metsarents, 20th century Armenian literature, 10th century literature, literary relations, literary article.
