SOME PROBLEMS INTRODUCING THE INSTITUTE OF MORAL DAMAGE COMPENSATION 2013 On November 5, 2012, the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia declared Part 2 of Article 17 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Armenia "Invalid", as it does not consider moral damage as a type of damage, does not provide compensation for moral damage, blocking a person 's access to court; and hindering the conscientious fulfillment of the international obligations of the Republic of Armenia.
 The Constitutional Court, taking into account that it is required in the systematic legislative regulation of the institute of material compensation for moral damage, which will include provisions on the concept of "moral damage", the scope of its application, grounds, clear procedure for calculating moral damage and other issues, Article 17 of the RA Civil Code The deadline for the invalidation of part 2 of Article 2 was set in 2014. October 1.
 Thus, the Constitutional Court ruled in the near future to introduce the institution of moral damages in civil legislation.
  Taking into account the legislation, legal experience and practice of the countries that have long used the institution of moral damages, it should be noted that a number of issues have remained almost unresolved due to the legislation related to the institution, the introduction and application of the institute, which our legislator does not foresee. Due to these mechanisms, they may cause problems for our legal system; civil law will add the institution of moral damages to its legal gaps.
One of the initial problems of the institute of compensation for moral damage, which should be paid attention to, is connected with the concept of "moral damage".
  The importance of the problem is that it is necessary to define as precisely as possible what the moral damage is, thus fixing the grounds for moral damage compensation.
  Moral damage is described in the Russian Civil Code as "physical or moral suffering" (Article 151).
As expressed in the plenum of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation of 20.12.1994 on the issues of application of the legislation on compensation for moral damage. In the decision, moral damage can be considered as immoral suffering related to the loss of relatives, impossibility to lead a socially active life, job loss, disclosure of family, medical secrets, dissemination of information that defames honor and dignity, insanity or other damage to health. associated with the acquisition of a disease as a result of physical pain, as a result of it or moral suffering.
  Moreover, these sufferings may arise as a result of the violation of the non-property rights of the person, as well as the property rights.
  The German Civil Code does not specifically mention the term moral damage, but refers to monetary compensation for non-property damage.
 This ambiguous settlement is fraught with serious consequences, as the principle of minima non curat praetor has been rooted in German case law, according to which in some cases the court rejects the claim for moral damages, considering them to be insignificant damages1.
The lack of a criterion of insignificance also causes difficulties in the distinction of significant և insignificant damages, for example, does a student with a disability for slaps have a right to claim damages?
  The French Civil Code does not differentiate between "non-pecuniary damage".
  Damage is mentioned as a general category.
  Nevertheless, in the theory of French civil law, there is such a difference in judicial practice.
In French jurisprudence, the notion of moral damage is considered simply a violation of non-property rights and goods, ie the French model does not directly link compensation for moral damage to the victim suffering, psychological or physical damage, which does not reflect the nature of moral damage.
  The semantic analysis of the concept of "moral damage" shows that when it acts as a violation not only of rights, but also of the damage caused as a result, we think that French civil law does not fully express the essence of the concept.
 As for the Anglo-Saxon legal system, it should be noted that here, too, there is no unified decision on the concept and terminology of moral damage.
 The term "mental damage" is widespread in England and the United States, with its various manifestations: psychological damage, psychiatric damage, nervous shock 2, nervous concussion, simple shock, simple concussion, etc.
 Such an approach, which is largely connected with the casual nature of case law, does not correspond to the continental, in particular, our legal system.
  It can operate within the framework of Anglo-Saxon case law.
Moral damages should be enshrined in law և the actions (types of inaction) or their limits, which may give rise to a claim for compensation for moral damages, ie such a definition of the concept of moral damages should be given: Moral damage is considered to be moral suffering caused to an individual, including fear, shame, humiliation or other psychologically unfavorable condition related to honor, violation of dignity, loss of relatives, impossibility to engage in active social life, loss of job, family 1 See Эрделевский А. , Compensation of moral value.
  Analysis and Comments on Legislation and Judicial Practices, 3rd ed., Moscow, 2007, p. 12.
2 Nervous shock. A typical example of a case for compensation for nervous shock is the case of Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police [1992] 1 AC 310.
Disclosure of other medical, personal and personal secrets այլ Violation of property, personal non-property rights in other ways, as well as physical suffering caused as a result of causing physical and organic harm to a person1.
  It should be noted here that according to the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, the moral damage caused as a result of violation of property rights is compensated only in cases provided by law.
 This refers to cases of violation of consumer rights, labor rights of citizens, property rights related to military service2.
 In all other cases, the Code does not allow to claim compensation for moral damage caused as a result of violation of property rights.
 This is not a fair approach. In many cases, as a result of causing property damage, the victim suffers more serious sufferings and feelings than in case of non-property damage.
  For example, if someone's newly renovated apartment is flooded due to negligence, causing not only material but also moral damage, the court rejects the claim for moral damages.
 But in many cases, even a small amount of damage to a person's property can cause serious suffering, pain, anxiety unintentionally, փոխ compensation for the damage caused to the property alone will not be enough to protect the rights of the person.
 In other words, the institution of compensation for moral damage will become an unused, formal tool, so we should refrain from such regulation of the RF Code, և envisage the right to claim compensation for moral damage in all cases of violation of property rights.
 Perhaps the legislation of the Russian Federation envisages the cases of compensation for moral damage caused as a result of property damage only for the legal purpose, to exempt the courts from unnecessary, unfounded claims for moral damage, but such cases can be prevented by clear judicial mechanisms.
As it was mentioned, moral damage is the damage caused to an individual, because the problem of the subjects of compensation for moral damage also gives rise to many disputes and contradictions.
  The question arises: can a legal entity suffer moral damages at all և demand compensation for them?
  According to the former Civil Code of the Russian Federation, citizens were recognized as subjects of compensation for moral damage.
 At the same time, the Code stipulated that a citizen could claim moral damages if his business reputation was tarnished.
  These rules also applied to legal entities, that is, there was an obvious contradiction, recognizing on the one hand the subject of compensation for moral damage to citizens, on the other hand, providing the right to claim it for legal entities.
  However, in the new Civil Code of the Russian Federation (Article 152) the issue was resolved: անձ legal entities were finally deprived of the right to compensation for moral damage.
1 Physical suffering refers to pain, including shock, neurosis, disfigurement of the body (especially in women), after causing discomfort, for example, a person gets tired at work rather than before harming himself (see ս http:
//uristy.ucoz.ru/publ/2-1-0-525).
2 See Dmitrieva O., Some Problems of the Institute of Compensation for Moral Value, "Journal of the Voronezh Institute of the Russian Federation", № 1, 2010, pp. 60-63.
In the case of our legislation, in order not to have such a problem, it is necessary to determine from the very beginning the possibilities of legal entities in the issue of compensation for moral damage.
  There are opinions that the law on legal entities should clearly stipulate a method of protection such as compensation for moral damage in case of violation of any non-property right1.
  The application of the norms governing the legal relations of compensation for moral damage must comply with the principle of equality (ie, it must be equally envisaged for both individuals and legal entities), hence the inadmissibility of their unequal application.
 Otherwise, the fundamental constitutional principle of equality as a necessary condition for the exercise of rights will be violated2.
 Some authors believe that legal entities are also entitled to compensation for orphan damage, but the legal entity is not suffering from moral or physical suffering, but it is simply a matter of business reputation, name violation, which can negatively affect the activities of the organization.
 In other words, in the case of legal entities, by saying moral damage, one must understand the negative consequences of the violation of the non-property rights of the organization, directly related to the disruption of the economic sphere3.
 There is an opinion that a legal entity should be able to claim compensation for moral damage in cases of breach of obligations, disclosure of trade secrets, illegal use of the trademark4.
  The European Court of Human Rights in its case "Commingersol SA v. Portugal" 5 came to the conclusion that the court could not exclude the right of a commercial organization to claim compensation for non-pecuniary damage, which could be a violation of the business reputation of the organization և inconvenience.
  In fact, it should be noted that the anxiety caused to the management of the organization, the obstacles to the management of the organization should at best be viewed as moral damage, directly inflicted on the management bodies - individuals, but not the organization.
 The cases of disclosure of trade secrets, illegal use of the trademark or other non-property rights are related to the violation of the business reputation of the organization, which is another civil law institution.
 In other words, compensation for moral damage should not be provided for legal entities, otherwise there will be a merging of the two independent elements of the civil law system - compensation for moral damage, honor, dignity and business reputation, although each of them has its object and object of protection.
 From the very meaning of moral damage 1 See Maleina M., Intangible treasures and perspectives of their development, "Law", 1995, № 10, p. 103; Compensation for non-property value, "Journal of the Supreme Court of the USSR", 1991, 1991 29.
2 See “Exercise of the President of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation V. D. Зорькина (Редакционный материал) ”,“ Российский судья ”, 2009, № 1, pp. 17, 18.
3 See Smirnov V. et al., Обсуждение Основ гражданского насододательства, "Круглый стол" журнала "Правоведение", ч. 2, 1992, № 2, pp. 104 -110.
4 See чаичанин А., Problems of housing and development perspectives of the institute of moral value, author. dis. к. ю. n., Moscow, 1995, page 7.
5 See http.
//echr.ketse.com/doc/35382.97-en-20000406/view/.
That is, moral or physical suffering, it should be noted that moral suffering can be endured only by the subject who has a mental inner world, physical suffering by a person who has a body.
  It seems absurd that a legal entity, being an artificial subject, a legal fiction, can bear those sufferings in general and demand compensation for moral damage.
 The same opinion is expressed by many scientists.
 Thus, V. Vitryansky considers that the practice of the courts of general jurisdiction to satisfy the claims for moral damages in favor of legal persons is a mere misunderstanding1 (of course, it is a matter of practice before the above-mentioned amendments to the Civil Code).
 In practice, such a conclusion was reached by the Supreme Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation, noting that, since the law determines the amount of compensation for moral damage, moral and physical suffering related to the individual characteristics of the person is taken into account. It is not possible to cause moral damage 2.
 Even in that case, how should the moral damage be determined, what circumstances should be taken into account?
  Thus, we can say that in reality it is necessary to exclude the possibility of legal entities compensation for moral damages and to enshrine it in law, especially considering that it will be equated with the institute of honor, dignity and business protection, which in some cases will lead to unnecessary controversy.
  In other words, in this issue we must remain of the same conviction: only citizens, individuals, can be the subject of compensation for moral damage.
As for the violation of the equality of legal entities and individuals in this case, the civil law defines the targeted (special) jurisdiction of legal entities, և the legal entity can not objectively carry such rights, which can be held only by citizens և vice versa3.
The next question concerns the submission of a claim for compensation by a third party for moral damage caused to a fully capable person, in particular, in case of violation of honor and dignity4.
  For example, in one case it may refer to the moral damage previously caused to the deceased, when it is demanded to be compensated by the family members of the deceased, and in the other case, to the moral damage caused to the person as a result of violation of the honor and dignity of his family members.
 Violation of honor, dignity and moral damage are not identical, therefore a person can claim compensation for moral damage only if he has an independent, personal interest there that needs protection.
 Moral damage is of an individual nature, as the court takes into account the degree of suffering related to the individual characteristics of the person when determining the extent of the damage.
 That is, the possibility of claiming compensation for moral damage by third parties should be ruled out.
1 See http.
//www.lawmix.ru/bux/45291/.
2 See Establishment of the Presidium of the Supreme Arbitration Court of the Russian Federation from 1 December 1998. № 813/98.
3 See Barseghyan T., Civil Law of the Republic of Armenia, part 1, 3rd edition, Yerevan, 2006, p. 118.
4 See Belyavsky A., Pridrovorov N., The Protection of Honors and Dignities of Persons in the USSR, Moscow, 1971, p. 89.
Determining the amount of compensation is considered to be an almost final issue by the legislation of the countries applying the Institute of Compensation for Moral Injury.
  Of course, the amount of moral damage cannot be calculated in the same way as in the case of property damage through value estimation.
 Under Russian law, the amount of compensation for moral damage is determined by a court within the limits of common sense and justice, taking into account the moral and physical suffering caused, the degree of guilt of the person who caused the damage1.
  Moreover, the nature of the suffering is assessed taking into account the factual circumstances of the damage և the individual characteristics of the victim.
 In fact, the lack of clearly defined criteria, on the one hand, creates problems for the courts, making it difficult to determine the size, and, on the other hand, is a basis for unnecessarily reducing or increasing the amount of compensation demanded by the courts.
 That is the reason why there have been cases in the case law of the Russian Federation when the court has reduced the amount of the claim in the lawsuit 9 thousand times 2.
 In other words, both the courts and the victims do not have clear criteria for assessing the amount of damage.
Thus, this institution loses its significance and efficiency, so it is necessary to develop and fix clear criteria for determining the amount of compensation.
  Various criteria are proposed in the literature, such as the public assessment of the factual circumstances of the injury, the degree and nature of the injury, the duration or duration of the deterioration, or even local customs and habits, etc.3.
 It is also put forward to take into account the property status of the victim.
 This is explained by the fact that for a person who is not in a good financial condition, as compensation for moral damage, less money should be compensated than for a well-off person, because in the first case, even a small amount can replace his suffering, make him happy with the same amount. to restore his former state of mind in the same way as the greater sum for the second.
 However, such an approach is unacceptable; it contradicts the principles of equality and justice.
  On the contrary, as a criterion, one can take into account only the property status of one of the violators of the rights, when imposing an obligation of moral damages on him.
  There is an opinion that it is unacceptable to take into account the individual characteristics of the victim when determining the amount of moral damages, arguing that the injured party may be based on other circumstances of being too sensitive, too "caring" for the body, while the compensation should be equal. It does not matter if the victim is a woman or a man, whether she is sensitive or not.
  However, we believe that a person's personality traits are a necessary criterion: they should be fixed, otherwise a strong athlete և slapped by an elegant woman on both sides 1 In certain cases (for example, illegal conviction or criminal prosecution, violation of honor, dignity, etc.) moral guilt not required for damages.
page 21.
3 See http.
//bit.ly/1hWPaXj.
compensation will be given in equal amounts, which is an unfair approach.
  The issue of standards in European countries is also not clearly regulated, ողջ the entire burden of resolving the issue is on the courts.
  Court cases are known, when the court set the wife who lost her husband in a car accident as compensation for moral damage 6500 pounds, noting that the woman is beautiful, sympathetic, 30 years old, can remarry.
 Or in another case K. Peterson, who was accused of assassinating the Swedish Prime Minister and later found not guilty by the court, demanded 2 million kronor in compensation. As a result, the claim was satisfied with 300 thousand. According to the religion, on the grounds that he had previously been convicted, he is currently a single pensioner and does not need to worry about taking care of his family or losing his job1.
  In other words, the courts are guided by different criteria in order to make fair decisions when examining such cases.
In our opinion, in determining the amount of moral damages, it is necessary to fix the following mandatory criteria, which should be taken into account by the courts, based on the specifics of the case.
 They are: a) in case of physical suffering: characteristics of the victim (sex, age), nature of bodily injury, duration of treatment, severity of consequences; b) psychological consequences of moral suffering, feelings, awareness of the severity of his condition, personality traits, ability to work after injury; ) in relation to the person causing the damage, his property status, degree of guilt.
These are the obligatory circumstances, which, only in case of taking into account and evaluating, it will be possible to determine the necessity, grounds, amount of compensation for moral damage within the limits of justice և to make a fair decision.
 Of course, these criteria cannot be exhaustive.
 In each case, depending on the specifics of the case, the courts will develop and apply new criteria, which will be the basis for their enactment in the future.
Very soon the domestic legal system will be supplemented with a new legal institute, which will lay the foundation for a new stage of civil law settlement.
  It will contribute to the raising of legal awareness, the formation of new judicial practice, will play an important role in the protection of civil rights of individuals.
  However, as it was mentioned, this institute can function իր carry out its functions only when it is free from defects as much as possible.
 In order to be systematically clearly regulated, the discussed issues must be solved correctly and effectively.
1 чаичанин А., էջ 89.
Tigran Dadunts SOME PROBLEMS OF INTRODUCTION OF INSTITUTE FOR COMPENSATION OF MORAL DAMAGE Keywords: institute of moral damage, concept of "moral damage", subjects of moral damage compensation, moral damage, moral damage of legal entities, moral damage.
