JARGONS IN MODERN ARMENIAN LANGUAGE Both in linguistic works and in everyday speech the approach is not differentiated towards the terms "jargon", "argo", "secret language".
  On the other hand, sometimes the boundaries of the professional vocabulary's jargon are sometimes unclear.
The study of jargons in this work will have the following inclusion: • General description, • Intra-jargon classification according to the spheres of public use, • Jargon phrases, their semantic-syntactic classification.
In "Aravot" daily L. Muradyan "Life is besamt loksh a. The article "Let's Silent in Hawaii" expresses the frequent concerns these days about the unnecessary use of slang, the distorted colloquial language of young people1.
  But we must not forget that part of the vocabulary is the more usability of the vocabulary, which in the period is conditioned by many non-linguistic factors: socio-economic situation, cultural influences, scientific and technical progress, social networks.
  According to the social-functional principle, it is customary to make the following classification with the vocabulary: • Conversational vocabulary, • Sociology, • Literature, • Slang words և expressions.
Some linguists distinguish child language words from slang, such as food, title, chop-chop, etc.2.
 The structural peculiarities of the slangs are conditioned by the peculiarity of the slang group.
  Summarizing the general features of the presented slang groups, it turns out:
• Redefining colloquial words. clean, stick, tear, stretch, poison.
• Foreign language + words composed in templates with Armenian or opposite syntax. to make money, to keep the course, with obshi.
1 "Aravot" daily, N 5, April 29, 2009.
2 See Jahukyan G., Aghayan E. ք others, Armenian language, Yerevan, 1980, page 314.
Jargon (French: Jargon - the word of any social or professional group that differs from the common colloquial language) is so difficult to find that each slang group is almost identical to the other, has its own history of origin and development.
 Having a unique history of origin and development is typical of Argo. 1930s From the 1930s onwards, a large number of people continued to be exiled to camps (the main management of the camps and locked places - the Gulag) in the exiles of the USSR, whose internal control system and laws were informally in the hands of "thieves in law" 1.
Under these conditions, an argon is formed, a "language" that was understood only within this criminal group, it was a reflection of his worldview.
  These points are generalized to the "language" used by the mafia, the emergence of which is associated with looting, robbery, armed attacks in southern Sicily.
 L. Chrisin mentions that due to the peculiarity of the Russian environment, the craftsmen had their "language", the carpenters, who moved from village to village, were often attacked, robbed by bandits, and persecuted by the authorities.
All this opposes them to hide their intentions from "others".
Their profession disappears over time, but many use the vocabulary 2.
We propose the following classification of this language layer: Argo idiom և slang.
(a) "Argo" (French: Argo - a separate closed group word created for linguistic isolation) or "secret language" is the language used in criminal groups, as computer, military or other non-slang groups do not need to hide what they have to say.
 Argo is characterized by a large number of vulgar uses and gestures.
  Since the "laws" of this group are based on 3 basic concepts (obshyag - universal treasury, panyak - principles, laws - skhodkas - consultation), then words expressing normative concepts - smatryashchi, putyov, shalava, zapretka (special instruction) meeting arrangement), abkhod (check).
  Letter abbreviations are often found: с.т.о.п. - son pardon you father, b.m.v. - бандитскаямашына вора, я.н. - я drug addict.
  Russian has its dominant influence in this language layer, due to the fact that the emergence of groups using this "language" took place in the USSR. ուլադիտ (уладить), նատուրի (в натуре), վազվռատ (возврат).
 b) In the second group, we have singled out army, computer, street-youth jargon under the general name of jargon.
The concept of computer jargon came into use in the late 20th century.
  The development of this field in the Armenian reality dates back to the first decade of the century.
  A characteristic feature can be considered the desire for compression. Transmission of more information in a shorter period of time, such as the Armenian versions of the terms 1 See "Special Report" program, September 26, 2011.
2 See Krisin L., Language in Contemporary Society, Moscow, 1977, pp. 33-35.
վութիւն.
 Here we mean on the one hand purely computer jargon (ram - hard disk, oz - RAM system, system block, personal computer - any wireless computer, shift, worm) և Internet jargon - click names, abbreviations (like, bg. , tejhanel, log out, chat, lol), symbols that express feelings, emotions (.
D, | B, Oo).
Youth slang.
  We have divided this jargon into two groups, schoolchildren, which is the result of striving for self-affirmation, showing their preferences.
  Most of the words cover the school environment. zubrit, common, fly, Slavic, spo.
Student jargon has the status of "senior", is subject to change to a greater extent than other groups, և is temporary.
The consciousness of young people, adolescents to be different, to separate, to disobey in some ways coincides with the worldview of criminal authorities, is influenced by argo.
Army jargon.
  K. Antashyan in his essay "The Army Theme as an Act of Freedom of Speech in Modern Armenian Release" notes that in the army, as in a closed system of forced cohabitation of men, the language layer of communication consists of components that are merely expressions of men's language thinking. , c) swearing, d) words and expressions left over from the Soviet army, e) concepts of "thieves' laws", f) army statutory terms translated from Russian into Armenian, g) regional dialects.
Examples of the above-mentioned points are: Garlakh, Yakhshi, Alit, Taburetka, Dedavshina, Stodnka, Gubakht, Uvalnyat, Samavolka, Dembel, Samavolchik.
Slang phrases.
  One of the main features of the phrases is the imagery, that is, the figurative-allegorical meaning typical of those jargons, which, no matter how popular, are to some extent also an expression of individual thinking. throw the lungs (torment), have a topic (clarification questions), keep hit (bored), lost face (disrespectful), throw a shower, the right dose, good brother, have a topic, hearth girl, break your legs, chew something, have interest, false flames, besprideldvizhen.
A number of extralinguistic factors inherent in everyday speech, such as improvisation, unrecordedness, and inconvenience, cause differences, in general, in contrasting any everyday written word.
  In everyday life, each slang-speaking group uses its "language", gestures, facial expressions, the character of the interlocutors, other non-linguistic factors are also conditions.
Anna Hambardzumyan SARGONS IN MODERN ARMENIAN LANGUAGE Keywords: slang, slang, cover language, youth slang, army slang, slang phrases.
