INCREASING THE EFFICIENCY OF GEOGRAPHY TRAINING IN SECONDARY SCHOOL IN DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES.
  Current trends in the development of society predict that in the future the socio-political and economic spheres will have high technological saturation.
 This equally applies to general education.
At the current stage of educational reforms, the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) is one of the conditions for increasing the effectiveness of education.
 Therefore, we believe that the use of modern information and communication technologies in the field of general education will greatly contribute to the provision of education.
The modern system of general education is impossible to imagine without information and communication technologies.
  The problem is not limited to providing the educational process with technical means and simple training of their usage methods.
 There is also a need for methodological support for the application of information technology in the teaching process.
  For the teacher, it should serve as a means of activating the lesson process, preparing the lesson, increasing the efficiency of the teaching process.
Currently, most public schools are equipped with computer classrooms, which provide a wide range of ICT applications.
  The use of information technologies in the lesson process should be carried out based on the age-individual characteristics of the students, the acquired knowledge.
  The effectiveness of the use of ICT opportunities depends on the teacher's appropriate abilities, skills and abilities, the level of mastery of ICT, as well as the skill of using them purposefully in the teaching process.
In order to find out the interdependence of students' intellectual potential ության in the education process, scientifically substantiated համապատասխան methodological guidelines with relevant practical experience are needed.
  At the same time, the requirements of the education system presented in the education system must be maintained, providing the possible - reasonable means of their implementation.
In this regard, the "Geography" course has a special role in general education, which forms a complete systematic knowledge about the "common home" of humanity, the planet Earth.
 In our opinion, the effectiveness of teaching geography is due to the professionally correct combination of teaching methods and modern technological approaches to teaching, which will ensure more effective use of ICT by learners in the learning process, contributing to the development of skills and abilities [2, pp. 53-55].
In geography classes, depending on the age characteristics of the students, the learning process can be organized using the following means of information and communication technologies: - slideshows, - computer presentations, - interactive whiteboards, - computer learning games, - computer tests, electronic libraries, - school world GIS.
The use of information and communication technologies in the educational process, in particular, computer equipment, allows to improve and modernize the process of teaching geography.
  Back in 1989 The Declaration on Education Information, approved by the UNESCO International Congress, stated that the new information technologies, which are an integral part of modern public culture, are aimed at improving the efficiency of the education system.
Recent scientific and practical work in this direction has substantiated the effectiveness of the use of information and communication technologies in the teaching process [3, p. 48].
Geography software is designed to build students' knowledge, creativity, skills and experience.
 With the help of computer programs it is possible to quickly change the demonstration material related to the taught topic: maps, tables, diagrams, slides, etc.
  It is an opportunity to present the taught topic in a more pictorial way.
 At the same time, using the Internet, it is possible to display aerospace photos, create diagrams, graphs, images of geographical phenomena that change in time and space.
  If necessary, a video corresponding to the content of the topic can be used in the learning process.
 By the way, it should be noted that the effective use of ICT in the process of teaching geography will provide the desired result if the classroom is equipped with appropriate material and technical means, and the teacher has the necessary information on the taught topic and methodological skills to use those tools.
Each geographical lesson or topic taught requires appropriate software.
  When compiling them, the following provisions should be followed: - When mastering the new material, a demonstration program should be used, which will make the topic clearer and clearer to the students. It will be more accessible. Use pre-made sketch maps, diagrams, photos, short videos, etc. [1, pp. 35-39]
The use of information and communication technologies in the teaching process, changing the traditional methods of teaching and learning, makes it possible to use methods that are in line with the "information age" to organize effective teaching.
 It is obvious that the use of these technologies in the teaching process saves time, maintains the discipline of students, activates them, arouses interest in the subject, promotes student-teacher cooperation, as well as increases the urgency and efficiency of the educational process.
  The use of ICT simultaneously develops perceptions, sustainable knowledge of effective nature use, pragmatic-practical significance of geography in the field of ecology.
 To ensure the accessibility of teaching, it is advisable to use the “PowerPoint” program of the Microsoft Office software package to organize the students' practical work.
 It is desirable to use "Excel", "Word" programs և other printed materials for processing materials.
With the help of computer technologies it is possible to conduct a knowledge test.
 Both ready-made and teacher-made computer tests can be used for this purpose.
  Students' knowledge can be tested both individually and in groups [4, p. 46].
In order to increase the students' interest and responsibility for the subject of geography, creative work can be put forward together with independent homework, making slide shows and computer performances.
Learning capacity development և Students' creative activity in lessons is directly related to the use of computer technology նպատակ Targeted teaching of the subject.
 The practical application of ICTs is especially important when working with geographical maps and field-touring observations.
Thus, using information and communication technologies, the teacher: • psychologically facilitates the process of students 'mastery of the material և increases the effectiveness of the lesson, • increases students' learning activity, • arouses interest in the subject, • promotes the formation of spatial worldview, • appreciates the practical significance of geography , • promotes easy comprehension of the lesson, • increases the desire to study the subject, • promotes a more complete mastery of the theoretical material, • enables learners to independently acquire geographical information, develops it using computer technology, • develops students' own point of view clearly and ability to express.
 The purposeful solution of these problems presupposes new methodological instructions and programs, which will ensure the transition of students from reproductive thinking to creative, will develop a constructive way of thinking, information culture, the ability to value it.
Literature 1. Galstyan S., Dialogue with the computer. Microsoft Office 2010, Yerevan, 2010, pp. 35-39.
2. Minasyan A., Methods and means of teaching Geography, Yerevan, 2011, pp. 53-55.
4. Таможняя E., Computer technologies.
  возможности использования, «География в Armen AjamoghlyanASHKHARHAGRUTYAN BARDZRATSUMEHANRAKRTAKAN EFFICIENCY IN SCHOOL EDUCATION, INFORMATION AND HAGHORDAKTSAKANTEKHNOLOGIANERI KIRARMAMBBanali words: information and communication technologies, Slideshow, computer presentations, interactive whiteboards, hamakargchayinusutsoghakan games, computer tests, electronic libraries.
