IRAN-ISRAEL RELATIONS 1948-1979 Historically, the Jews and the Persians had generally friendly relations, but the geopolitical realities of the late 20th century dramatically changed the nature of international, already interstate, relations.
  This article examines the development of relations between the two countries from the establishment of the state of Israel to the period of the Islamic Revolution in Iran, as well as the internal and external factors influencing their formation.
1947 On November 29, 1945, UN General Assembly Resolution 181 divided Palestine under a British mandate into two states, the Jewish-Arab.
 1948 In May of that year, the first Prime Minister of Israel, David Ben-Gurion, announced the creation of the state of Israel.
  By the way, Iran, together with 12 other states, voted against the resolution, but after the latter materialized, Iran, reviewing the new geopolitical situation, tried to clarify relations with the countries of the region.
  First, Iran became the second Muslim state after Turkey to recognize the existence of the state of Israel, thus challenging the Arab states in the region, whose position on this issue differed sharply from that of Iran. The vast majority of Middle Eastern countries (Syria, Lebanon, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen) voted against the Palestinian Partition Resolution 2.
  However, it should be noted that Iran recognized Israel only de facto. It was not fixed by a legal document, as the opinions on this issue were diverse.
  They were divided into three main directions: the National Front led by Mohammad Mossadegh, the groups of Ayatollah Khashani and Mohammad Reza Shah Pahli3.
  The main problem, unfortunately, was that the Iranian society was oriented towards the Arab states, as the latter were closer to Iran in terms of religion, customs and culture4, while the political priorities dictated otherwise.
It is necessary to remember the fact that the benevolent Iran had just gotten rid of the post-war crisis, and Great Britain և the United States, full of interest 1 See the official website of the Israeli Foreign Ministry, available at http: // www.
//www.mfa.gov.il/mfa/foreignpolicy/peace/guide/pages/un%20general%20assembly%20resolution%20181.aspx (accessed 10.12.2014).
2 Israel International Relations.
 International Recognition of Israel, available at http: // www.
//www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/Peace/recogIsrael.html (accessed 11.12.2014).
3 Sobhani S., The Pragmatic Entente.
 Israeli-Iranian Relations.
 1948-1988, New York, 1989, p. 11.4 Ibid., P.
Using Iranian oil, they tried to establish an anti-Soviet camp in the region, the first of which, of course, was Israel, which owed its existence to the United States and Great Britain.
 Iran and Turkey should have formed the second row.
  In fact, Iran was in the stage of post-conflict stabilization, and Israel was in the stage of becoming a state.
 Therefore, both needed to ensure at least their own security in the face of regional instability.
With this in mind, Israel's first prime minister, David Ben-Gurion, proposed the "Periphery Doctrine" ("Alliance of Periphery") 1, which was supposed to ally with non-Arab states in the Middle East, as it was impossible to resist them without a strong regional base.
 According to Ben-Gurion, this circle consisted of Sunni Muslims, but not Arab Turkey in the north, Shiite Muslims, non-Arab Iran in the east, and mostly Christian Ethiopia in the south.
  This concept was the beginning of Israel-Iran cooperation, which, however, did not go without obstacles.
1951 Mohammad Mossadegh became the Prime Minister of Iran, after which, in 1952, the Iranian Consulate in Israel was closed.
 The government claimed that it had failed because of budget problems, but Sohrab Sobhannington argued that the closure of the consulate was in fact intended to gain the support of Arab states for the nationalization of Iranian oil at the UN2.
 The consulate was not officially reopened later.
A number of factors contributed to the formation of Iran-Israel allied relations, including: Accepting the USSR as a common opponent.
 The creation of the state of Israel coincided with the Cold War between the two major players in world politics, the United States and the USSR, which played a significant role in Iran's foreign policy developments, as a choice had to be made to join the camp.
  In the meantime, the USSR, trying to play a role in Middle Eastern geopolitics, supported Iranian opposition parties (such as the pro-Soviet Tudeh (People's Party) and the Arab world.
  Based on this, Iran, ruled by the Shah, perceiving the USSR as a force provoking internal instability, clearly turned to the United States.
 The main manifestation of this was in 1955. The Baghdad Pact, which included Iraq, Turkey, Pakistan, and the United Kingdom.
 Israel originally had an American orientation5, so foreign policy interests united Iran and Israel.
1 Israeli Relations with Iran, available at http: // www.
//www.iranicaonline.org/articles/israel-i-relations-with-iran#pt1 (accessed 11.12.2014).
3 Almost no country (including Iran) except the United States and the USSR had sufficient resources to pursue an independent policy during this period, which is why the period from World War II to the collapse of the USSR is known as the Yalta-Potsdam system of bilateral world relations or international relations.
4 For more details, see Keddie N., Modern Iran.
 Roots of Revolution, Yale University Press, 2006, p. 139.
5 Parsi T., The Treacherous Alliance.
 The Secret Dealings of Israel, Iran and the US, Yale University Press, 2007, 2. Its position on Egypt.
 During the reign of Jamal Abd al-Nasser (1956-1970), Egypt was indeed the leading country in the Arab world.
 The Nasserite pan-Arab ideology was dangerous for non-Arab states in the region, including Iran.
  1955-1956 The United States refused to supply arms to Egypt, and recently announced that it would receive arms from Czechoslovakia, which was in fact a Soviet weapon being smuggled through Czechoslovakia.
  Thus, Egypt began to establish warmer relations with the USSR, which combined the two common dangers.
3. Immigration of Jews living in Iraq through Iran.
 Before the establishment of the state of Israel, many Jews lived in Iraq, but in the conditions of the existence of sovereignty, the issue of their transfer to the new state arose.
  This was possible only through Iran, as there was a lot of repression against the Jews in Iraq, while in Iran the attitude towards the Jewish minority was much more tolerant2.
4. The common position on the Kurdish issue in Iraq.
  Until the 1960s. Including Israel, it supported the Iraqi Kurds in every possible way in the struggle against the central authorities3.
  Iran understood that the Kurds were the main factor of destabilization in Iraq, so Mossad and Savak, respectively the Israeli and Iranian intelligence services, joined forces to support the Kurdish struggle in Iraq4.
1958 The Mossad also set up an Israel-Iran-Turkey tripartite intelligence alliance, in which the three countries exchanged spies. Carrying out joint intelligence operations5.
 Until 1959 Tehran and Tel Aviv expanded military relations, maintaining cooperation until the Islamic Revolution.
The fledgling state of Israel needed oil to build and develop its own economy.
 No Arab state has ever had diplomatic relations with Israel; it is natural that in the period of Nasserism, in the conditions of the rise of the pan-Arab ideology and the Palestinian cause, no Arab state dared to contribute to the establishment of the newly created state.
  And Iran already in 1957. began selling oil to Israel6.
 The peak of cooperation in the energy and economic sphere in 1971-1977. They were when Israel became one of the top ten trading partners of Iran.
  Among them 1 Sobhani S., p. 18.
 Karapetyan R., The Modern History of the Arab Countries, Yerevan, 2003, p. 180.
3 Minasyan S., The Israeli-Kurdish Relations, available at http:
//www.noravank.am/upload/pdf/256_en.pdf (available on 12.12.2014).
5 Kaye D., Nader A., ​​Roshan P., Israel and Iran.
 A Dangerous Rivalry, RAND corporation, Pittsburgh, 2011, p. 29, available at http: // www.
//www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/monographs/2011/RAND_MG1143.pdf (accessed 13.12.2014).
6 This year is due to the fact that Israel, especially during the Suez Crisis, carried out military attacks on Jordan, Syria and Egypt, due to which it was extremely weakened, unable to take care of domestic needs alone.
 During this period, Iran was Israel's main ally, primarily in the energy sector.
The annual turnover reached $ 200 million 1.
  1957 for the implementation of energy programs. The Eilat-Ashkelon oil pipeline, which connected Israel to the Gulf of Ahab, was built.
 In this way, Iran and Israel avoided the transportation of oil through the Suez Canal, which at least in 1956. It has been controlled (nationalized) by Egypt since the Suez Crisis.
  In addition, an oil refinery was established in Ashdod, and the port of Eilat was renovated2.
In return for the work done, Israel offered Iran experts in the field of agriculture and military training.
Israel then became the second largest arms supplier to Iran after the United States3, because the interest, of course, was to pursue a more independent policy, not to rely solely on the United States for security.
  This prompted Iran to make Israel an alternative source of arms.
 Moreover, in 1966 Iran, noticing the explosive danger of movements in Arab countries, bought $ 6 million worth of weapons from Israel to ensure its own security - 4.
Although Iran and Israel did not have reciprocal embassies, the Israeli Trade Mission was established in Tehran in 1958.
 Iran, in its turn, still in 1950. He had set up a department of Iranian interests at the Swiss embassy in Tel Aviv5, that is, there were already serious diplomatic contacts between the two countries.
  According to T. The evidence of this in Persia is that Iranian officials in the 1950s. They were secretly sent to Israel through Turkey, and vice versa6.
Already in the 1960s. Due to the centralized domestic policy, unprecedented economic growth and other factors, Iran was clearer in its foreign policy.
  During that time Shah carried out many socio-economic reforms under the banner of "White Revolution" 7.
At the same time, however, the popularity of Khomeini's eight other opposition groups was growing in the country.
  1960 Nasser severed ties with the Shah and supported Khomeini in 1963. the uprising, which was a reaction to the "White Revolution".
Khomeini, as he considered cooperation with Israel to be anti-Islamic, in this context began to put the issue of Iranian-Israeli relations on the agenda of protests and demonstrations.
1 Iran-Israel relations yesterday and today, New Eastern Enlightenment.
 07.10.2013, available at http:
//ru.journal-neo.org/2013/10/07/rus-irano-izrail-skie-otnosheniya-vchera-i-segodnya-chast-1/ (available 12.12.2014).
2 See ibid.
4 Ibid., P. 50.
5 Ibid., P.
7 Shahram C., Zabih S., The Foreign Relations of Iran.
  A Developing State in a Zone of Great-Power Conflict, 8 Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini (1900-1989), the founder of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the first Supreme Leader.
  Due to open opposition to the Shah in 1964-1978. He was in exile, but during that time he also carried out anti-profit propaganda.
 After returning to Iran, the Islamic Revolution took place under his leadership.
 Until now, Khomeini is considered a cult object in Iran.
 Available at http:
//www.biography.com/people/ayatollah-ruhollah-khomeini-13680544#political-and-religious-leader; http:
//www.saylor.org/site/wpcontent/uploads/2011/08/HIST351-11.1.1-Ayatollah-Ruhollah-Khomeini.pdf (accessed 19.01.2014).
From the regional point of view, the main problems were the struggle against the Soviet power and pan-Arabism.
  As for the international arena, it should be noted that the Cold War was not as intense as in the 1950s, as the United States was preoccupied with the Vietnam issue and the USSR with China.
During this period, Iran continued to gain economic and military power from the growing volume of oil sales.
 This tendency has finally allowed Iran to have less ties with Israel, to improve relations with Arab countries.
 At the same time, however, he did not sever ties with Israel, as the latter contributed to the development of Iran's military force and agriculture; through the Jewish lobby, it increased Iran's prestige in Washington.
Nevertheless, Jamal Abd al-Nasser continued to intensify anti-Iranian sentiment at the regional level, calling on Iraq to join Syria against Iran.
  It was also facilitated by the fact that Syria in 1958-1961. It was part of the United Arab Republic with Egypt.
  Responding to the call, these countries began to emphasize that the Iranian province of Khuzestan is in fact Arabia, եցին the Persian Gulf was renamed the Arabian Gulf.
 After that, the interest severed relations with Syria, which increased the existing isolation.
 Meanwhile, during this period, large Jewish forces were involved in 1962. Development and implementation of a development project in the earthquake-stricken Ghazvin region3.
  This course of relations between the Arab countries and Israel pushed Iran to turn to Israel more noticeably.
Despite the cooperation in the above-mentioned spheres, during all the Arab-Israeli wars, the interests have always openly defended the Arab states.
 For example, in 1956 During the Suez Crisis, Iran defended Egypt against Israel.
  1967 Immediately after the six-day Arab-Israeli war, Iran urged Israel to restore its pre-war borders.
  It was after this war that the vector of Iran's regional policy began to shift from Israel to Egypt.
  This was partly because the interest did not want Israel to gain too much power.
However, this situation did not last long, as in Iraq in 1958. The established socialist Ba'athist regime, according to which Iraq's orientation towards the USSR forced Iran to return to Israel և West, despite the fact that in 1975. In March, Iran, without consulting with Israel and the United States, signed an agreement with Iraq in Algeria, giving it the right to transport oil through Shatt al-Arab and, in return, undertaking not to interfere in Kurdish activities in Iraq.
 In this period, we can say that Iran pursues a multi-vector policy.
However, the main event that took place before that, which more clearly emphasized the change in Iran's relations with Israel, was in 1973. It was the Arab-Israeli war when Egypt attacked from the west of Israel and Syria tried to capture the Golan Heights from the east1.
During this war, Iran again supported the Arabs, although outwardly maintaining a neutral position.
 Shah sent medical aid and helicopters to the Arab states, allowing the Soviet air force to transport military equipment through its territory.
  This was done not only "for the sake of" religious unity of civilizational similarities with the Arab countries, but also due to internal pressures in Iran.
  However, during this time Iran sent some military aid and oil to Israel2.
  At the same time, he forbade Australian volunteers to cross into Israel.
  Such behavior of Iran clearly showed that the warm relations with Israel were beginning to break down.
Analyzing the new situation, it should be noted that such a balanced stance of Iran among the "Arab states" of Israel was due to the fact that if Israel gained too much power as a result of the war, the Arab states would take a more radical stance towards Iran and begin to perceive it as a real enemy. Iran would have contributed to that.
 On the other hand, if Israel failed, the Arab world would do everything in its power to weaken Iran.
 The problem was that if the conflicts in the Middle East continued, the USSR would have the opportunity to intervene on a larger scale, because the United States, as already mentioned, was involved in the Vietnam War.
In addition, in 1973. The war showed that the Arab states began to focus on their own security, rather than on pan-Arab ideas, which weakened the Nasser threat posed by "Iran and Israel" at the time.
  1970 After the death of Jamal Abd al-Nasser, Shahis began to ally with the new president Anwar al-Sadat, which paved the way for cooperation with other Arab states4.
1970s There was widespread public discontent in Iran over relations with Israel.
  The population especially in 1967 և 1973. After the wars, it was directed against Israel, which was given more prominence by the clergy and anti-monarchist forces5.
1977 The issue of Iranian-Israeli rapprochement arose again when Iraq received military assistance from the USSR, while the United States refused to provide similar assistance to Iran, which caused chaos in both Iran and Israel.
  As a result, the two countries developed a joint missile program independent of the United States6.
  Shortly afterwards, in order to alleviate public unrest, Shah appointed Shapuh Bakhtiar as Prime Minister, who drastically changed Iran's policy towards Israel.
  He significantly improved Iran's relations with Arab countries by supporting R. Karapetyan, pp. 200-202.
the idea of ​​providing a living space for the Palestinians by suspending the sale of oil to Israel 1.
  Or Sh. Bakhtiar remained in office until 1979. On February 11, 1945, his changes in Iranian policy greatly influenced the further course of events.
The Islamic Revolution in Iran greatly changed the course of Iran's foreign policy, both regionally and internationally, in particular, relations with Israel sharply strained.
 Although Reza Shah Pahl did not have an openly pro-Israel stance, the already warm relations with Israel during the revolutionary demonstrations were considered the main political mistake of the Shah - this was the point where the left front and religious groups came to an agreement.
Despite Khomeini's clear anti-Israel stance, Iran and Israel continued to have similar interests in the region as they continued to be surrounded by Arab states, and the Soviet Union, targeting Afghanistan, continued to play a role in the Middle East.
  That is why a dilemma arose between the "practical needs" of Khomeini's ideology.
  Khomeini's ideology included ideas of "weak" և "strong", non-Eastern nor Western state, "right" (Islam) և "wrong" paths, such as Third World theories such as imperialism and neo-imperialism, colonization and neo-colonialism. He explained how the Western powers had oppressed the Muslims in order to exploit them.
 And he was trying to combine all this with Shiite Islam.
  It was for this reason, I think, that in the beginning Iran did not clarify its foreign policy preferences.
From that time on, anti-Israel "anti-Zionist" ideas began to spread in Iran.
  In particular, the religious forces emphasized that Israel was an illegal state built on stolen Muslim lands3.
 It is possible that the term "Muslim lands" was used instead of "Arab lands" 4, probably to avoid ethnic segregation, as Iran's interest in the Palestinian territories would be incomprehensible.
  And in case of calling it "Muslim", Iran at the same time avoided such a situation, improving relations with neighboring Arab states.
 In the same way, the Arab-Israeli conflict portrayed Khomeini as pan-Islamic.
  In addition, Khomeini put forward the thesis that the ulema or the clergy should purify Islam, and its main obstacles were Christianity, Zionism, and materialism, which were spread by the West in Iran during the Shah's regime.
 Khomeini also made a clear distinction between the Jews and the Jews. 1 See Sobhani S., pp. 111-112.
2 Hunter Sh., Iran and the World.
  Continuity in a Revolutionary Decade, Bloomington.
  Indiana University Press, 4 This term was changed many times during the Islamic Revolution; the term "sacred lands" is used today.
և Among the Zionists և.
 Judaism, like Christianity, is considered a monotheistic religion and tolerated in Iran, while Zionism was not acceptable.
  It was with such an ideological basis that Khomeini was able to make the revolution in Shiite Iran an example for the neighboring Sunni Islamic states.
 It can be said that the Iranian revolution threw the political Islamists.
The first official announcement of the severance of Iranian-Israeli relations in 1979. It was February 11, when the Israeli Interests Office was captured in Tehran.
  The leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), Yasser Arafat, visited Tehran on February 18, 2006 to meet with Ayatollah Khomeini, after which the office became the KGB embassy2.
  After that, Arafat also opened offices in the Iranian city of Ahvaz, where the majority of the population is Arabic-speaking3.
Despite Khomeini's pro-Palestinian approach, Iran did not provide material support to Palestine, it was limited to public statements.
  That is why Iran's relations with the neighboring Arab states, especially Bahrain, Kuwait and Iraq, where there was a large Shiite population, began to deteriorate again4.
  However, in a short period of time, Khomeini's policy of preserving "pure" Islamic values ​​and Israel's growing tension with the Arab states finally eliminated the existing atmosphere of tolerance in Iranian-Israeli relations.
1948-1979 The nature of the Iranian-Israeli relations during this period differs sharply from the relations that have existed since then.
  The rupture in interstate relations during the first Iran-Iraq or Gulf War, deepening over the years, has today led to the two states not recognizing each other, which is one of the important factors influencing the geopolitics of the modern Middle East.
  It can be assumed that any step towards normalization of relations is not realistic during the current regimes in the two countries, but this article clearly shows that in the case of a suitable environment, in the common interest, there can be good-neighborly relations between Iran and Israel.
1 Bahgat G., Iran, Israel and the United States.
 The Nuclear Paradox, The Journal of Social, Political and EconomicStudies, 32, No. 1 (April 1, 2007), pp. 3-21, available at http: // www.
//www.jspes.org/pdfs/spring2007/JSPES321Bahgat.pdf (accessed 14.12.2014).
3 See ibid., P. 84.
Mher Hakobyan IRANA-ISRAELI RELATIONS 1948-1979 Keywords: Iranian-Israeli cooperation, mutual interests, recognition of Israel, "Concept of the Border", Jamal Abd al-Nasser, USA, USSR, Egypt, Egypt.
