MEDICAL-GEOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION OF GYUMRI CLIMATE Man is constantly exposed to the elements of climate.
  Hippocrates (460-377 BC) believed that the egg of the human body, the moral norms reflect the nature of the place of residence ությունը the change of seasons, which often cause diseases.
  And Abuib Sina (Avicenna, 980-1037) noticed a connection between geographical conditions and the state of the human body.
The medical-geographical assessment of the climate is given taking into account the combinations of separate natural factors.
 For example, the simple solar weather creates comfortable conditions for all living organisms that live during the day to absorb vitamin D, heat and vitamin D.
 Sun vapors are characterized by the stimulating effect of radiation.
If the radiation is intense, the amount of heat load on the human body increases, especially during heavy physical work.
Cloudy weather reduces the beneficial effects of ultraviolet rays, but at the same time helps to calm and concentrate the body.
Atmospheric precipitation dramatically changes the nature of the weather և affects human behavior.
  They clean the air, increase the ionization of the air.
Lightning increases the amount of ozone.
 All this strengthens the respiratory function, gives vitality.
Gloomy, humid weather contributes to depression, ատարած pervasive snowfall, on the contrary, has a calming role.
17210C temperature հանգիստ 60-65% moderate humidity are considered comfortable for a healthy person.
  Comfort conditions are not the same for all people.
  It depends on the resistance of the individual organism, weight, occupation, age, sex.
Low temperature leads to constriction of blood vessels in the extremities, slowing of blood circulation, irritation of the nervous system.
 During the winter months, due to the sharp drop in temperature, the number of diseases caused by colds increases.
 Such a tendency can be significantly reduced by hardening the body, ie by reconstructing physicochemical processes in tissues, increasing overall metabolism, strengthening the function of the thyroid gland, regulating the speed of blood circulation in the brain, strengthening the heart muscle, regulating internal organs and other means.
The human body is affected not only by the existing weather, but also by the process of weathering and its change.
 The elements whose deviation is greater than the best (optimal) size have a pathogenic role.
 Meteorological elements affect sick and healthy people in different ways.
 Most of them do not notice the change in the weather, but a sharp change in healthy people can cause bad mood, decreased ability to work and other phenomena.
Recently, research on the creation of a hypersensitive state in the body due to solar activity is developing rapidly.
It especially affects the population suffering from infectious-allergic, cardiovascular, endocrine system diseases.
The whole mechanism of influence of meteorological elements on man has not been discovered, but many years of research show that man is hypersensitive to changes in natural phenomena.
 In the field of medical climatology, the climate-human-health relationship is especially widely discussed.
 Numerous researchers have developed a number of scales for classifying and assessing the impact on weather health, but the most practical is E. It is a complex method developed by Feodorov.
E. Feodorov և L. The complex method developed by Chubukov (1964) compiles a catalog (catalog), which gives the average, absolute maximum, minimum and minimum indicators of the elements of the daily weather (temperature, humidity, wind, etc.).
 They are grouped into three types: annual frosts, transitional և frosty periods և Characterized by 14 classes.
Temperature characteristics are supplemented by the dominant characteristics of the weather: lightning, cloudiness, precipitation, wind, humidity, atmospheric pressure, etc.
  This method can also be used for climate-medical-geographical analysis of Gyumri, using the diagrams of weather types given in the "Armenian National Atlas".
The separation of methods according to the thermal insulation index CLO (clo) has become quite widely used.
 1 clone permanently ensures the comfort (comfort) of a person sitting or resting at 50 kcal / heating, 21 air temperature, 50% relative humidity և 10 cm / s in wind conditions.
 In case of 0.5 kg you can wear a light shirt, and in case of 4.5 kg you should wear a fur coat (2).
Let's analyze the impact of Gyumri weather elements on the population.
Meteorological characteristics of Gyumri (according to RA Ministry of Internal Affairs II-7-01-2011) Table 1. Meteorological characteristics Months Air temperature, ° C Atmospheric precipitation, mmHi air humidity,% Ar-gloss, hour 1. Air temperature.
 Thermal comfort for the organism - a comfortable state is considered the air temperature 17-22 0C.
 The average annual air temperature in Gyumri is 6.3 0C, the absolute minimum is -36 0C, and the maximum is 38 0C.
Extremely low temperature discomfort conditions are created in Gyumri during January, when the temperature drops to -20-22 0C, sometimes lower.
 Such colds start from the end of November until the middle of the war.
 In January, the air temperature drops to -30 0C և is maintained for 4-6 days.
  There are different approaches to assessing the cold winter weather.
  According to the Bodman weather severity index, winter conditions are moderately severe.
  Appropriate clothing is needed to withstand low temperatures.
  Wearing winter clothes starts from the first ten days of November to the beginning of April.
The opportunities to do outdoor work will be limited, and in case of doing it, you should dress warmly about 4 kilos.
2. Humidity of the air.
  Humidity has a certain effect on this organism.
 30-60% relative humidity is considered a hygienic norm, below 20% is considered dry air, 71-85% - moderately humid, and above 86% - super humid.
 Moderately moist air promotes the normal functioning of the body, ie the skin, airways, mucous membranes have sufficient moisture և provides constant internal moisture in the body.
The large amount of moisture and heat has a morbid significance.
 They are mainly associated with skin diseases.
The relative humidity in Gyumri fluctuates around 82-84% in winter (Table 1), and in spring - 70-71%, ie these conditions are estimated to be moderately humid.
 In summer, on the contrary, the air is relatively dry - 62-64%, drought weather is typical, տարբեր various allergic and respiratory diseases become active in the population.
  Low humidity ևHigh temperature conditions cause discomfort.
  In July-August, such situations are created in Gyumri for 7-8 days during the month.
The inconvenience of the environment is the unfavorable environment for human health, life and activities.
  The maximum and minimum values ​​of discomfort are the values ​​that are extreme for the survival of the organism.
 In Gyumri, the minimum value of the inconvenience coefficient (according to Arakava) is 17.3 վում is observed in January, it starts to grow from February, reaching a maximum in July-August - 64.6.
  The discomfort has a negative impact on the population with cardiovascular, nervous, allergic diseases [1, p. 13].
3. Atmospheric precipitation.
  Wet, rainy weather has a negative effect on people with arthritis and rheumatism, and droughts again create incomplete conditions for the body, for example, the amount of dust and dangerous compounds in the air increases.
Atmospheric precipitation in Gyumri does not create serious inconvenience. The annual quantity is 500 mm.
  About 28% of precipitation falls in April-May, and in September-October - 14%.
The amount of precipitation during the winter is 13.8%.
  The average layer of snow is 30-50 cm.
  Foggy weather is typical in winter. The number of foggy days in the period from December to February is 42 days.
  Winter weather causes an uncomfortable situation for the population - poor visibility, tension.
  For this reason, a large proportion of car accidents in winter, fractures of various complications due to slipping (about 10-13% of patients who apply during the year).
4. Atmospheric pressure.
  At the heart of the physiological effect of atmospheric pressure is its effect on closed receptors, such as the chest, abdomen, full organs, such as the stomach, intestines, etc., as well as the receptors of the circulatory system.
Atmospheric pressure at sea level is 760 mm Hg or 1013 Mb, and in Gyumri the average is 612 mm Hg or 815 Mb.
Man does not feel enormous pressure of the atmosphere - 16 years.
  Negative chest pressure, which occurs during inhalation, provides air to the lungs, external pressure, on the contrary, promotes exhalation.
  The whole system of blood circulation is regulated by the difference of hydrostatic pressure և is correlated with external pressure.
  Atmospheric pressure is high, then the maximum և minimum pressure of arterial pressure decreases, the pulsation in the body becomes more frequent, the amount of nitrogen increases, which causes a worsening of the feeling.
  Another relationship is possible when low pressure leads to a decrease in arterial pressure.
 It can cause morbid symptoms: weakness, headache, nausea, loss of appetite.
Due to the difference of partial pressures of gases, gas exchange is constantly realized in the organism.
  The cardiovascular system is most sensitive to changes in atmospheric pressure.
Atmospheric pressure increases from November to February.
 In the spring months it has relatively little change of 844.4 MB, 843.3 MB.
  In summer, on the contrary, the pressure is low and the share of cardiovascular disease is high.
  The latter is small in the period from January to April, and from September it starts to grow.
 The relatively convenient period for this disease is the period from January to March, and the inconvenient period is from May to September [1, p. 15].
5. Winds.
  Due to the uneven distribution of atmospheric pressure, air mass shifts occur.
  The air moves from high pressure areas to low pressure areas, ք wind is generated.
Wind is the movement of air in a horizontal direction relative to the Earth's surface.
The effect of winds on people is twofold.
 On hot days it cools the body, soothes the heat.
 During the winter, on the contrary, it reduces the heat sensation, that is, the wind speed is inversely proportional to the real air temperature.
 For example, when the air temperature is -20 0C, and the wind speed is 6-7 m / s, the heat sensation will be -28.9, that is, the wind causes a person to feel less than real heat in cold weather.
Table 2. Wind Behavior in Gyumri (according to RA Ministry of Internal Affairs II-7-01-2011) Average speed, m / s MonthsHs-Ar.Arl.Hv.-Arl.JanuaryAprilJulyOctober Hv.-Arm.Arm.Hs.-Arm Absence of wind in strong heat creates an uncomfortable situation for a person.
 In winter, on clear nights, temperature rotations are observed in the city, as a result of which the air pollution increases.
 The average number of windless days reaches 18-20 in January, 8-10 in April-July, and 15-17 in October.
According to Table 2, the winds in Gyumri are relatively intense during the year from April to September, prevailing in the northeastern and northern directions, and in winter the winds weaken, blowing from the northeast to the west.
 In winter, the wind speed is not only weak - 0.6-1.2 m / s, but it changes little during the day.
 Meanwhile, in the hot season of the year, the second half of the day intensifies significantly, which indicates the presence of mountain valley winds.
Thus, assessing the ecological role of the climatic conditions of Gyumri, the following can be said.
  Unfavorable air temperature conditions are created for the health and well-being of the population during the season in winter, especially in January-February and summer.
 Temperature rotation also has a negative effect.
  Humidity conditions are estimated to be moderately humid, with a maximum of 89% in May, but low relative humidity վերջին late summer և high temperatures (+28, +30 0C) create droughts with high DG values.
  In winter, strong winds reduce the EEG, and in summer, activate the movement of dust accumulated in the streets, contribute to the intensification of allergic, various diseases of the upper respiratory tract.
The health condition of the population changes according to the seasons of the year.
Spring-summer conditions affect especially the nervous-endocrine systems (N. Gluck և others), worsens the condition of tuberculosis patients (H. Stukolo, V. Navruyk և others).
  Narmatism has a seasonal expression in early spring and late autumn (O. Deryabina et al.).
  Seasonality is also expressed in the quantitative indicators of some diseases.
  Such are pneumonia, inflammation of the upper respiratory tract, angina, flu.
  Studies have shown that the human body is more sensitive to the flu pathogen in autumn than in spring (V. Zhdanov, V. Ritorova).
 The cardiovascular system is more sensitive to seasonality.
  As a rule, the factors that negatively affect this disease are wind, sharp changes in temperature, changes in atmospheric pressure, etc.
 Studies related to the activity of arterial pressure and heart work were performed by V. Ushakov (1970), S. Abdulov (1972), A. Gaza (1979), A. Solomatin (1982).
  But the conclusion is almost the same, that the weather has a much greater effect on the physiological functions of the heart in patients than in healthy people.
The influence of the weather on the course of gastric and duodenal ulcers was found out in early times.
 They intensify especially in autumn պակաս relatively less in spring.
  Skin diseases have a pronounced nature [2, pp. 180-188].
All seasons of the year are clearly expressed in Gyumri.
 The seasons are separated on the basis of changes in the average air temperature.
 Winter starts when it drops below 0 0C, summer t> 15, autumn from <15 to 0, spring> from 0 to 15.
  Each season is usually divided into three sub-seasons.
  Winter is divided into winter - 0 -5 0C, deep winter - -5 0C, end of winter - 5 -0 0C.
Winter in Gyumri starts in the second half of November, and from December onwards there are mild to severe frosts (-13-22 0C), which have a 20-40% probability.
  Their share reaches more than 80%.
  The probability of these seasons decreases by 45-60% in February, and in the first half of March (end of winter) the probability of mild to moderate frosty weather is 20-25%.
 Fog is one of the typical weather conditions in winter.
 The number of foggy days is 14 days in December, and 17 և 11 days in January and February, respectively.
In order to alleviate the cold, uncomfortable conditions of the external environment, to prevent diseases, the heating season begins, the population wears warm clothes, and in Gyumri the expiration dates of the seasonal clothes of the population are followed as follows.
 Spring in Gyumri starts from the tenth day of March, the population gets rid of warm winter clothes, as the air temperature rises above 0 0C.
 It lasts 81 days վում is divided into spring (0-5 0C), green spring (5 -10) ավարտ end of spring (above 10).
 These months are characterized by less cloudy (up to 50% probability), cloudy during the day up to 20%, almost as much as rainy weather.
 Such damp, rainy weather has a negative effect on people with arthritis, rheumatism and other diseases.
 During this time, the types of warm clothing are gradually being replaced by warm ones.
Summer in Gyumri starts from the second half of June and lasts until the middle of September.
 The total duration is 92 days.
Dry insoles have a probability of up to 5%, and moderately dry (above 22%, relative humidity - 40-60%) have up to 30% probability.
  In summer, the comfort factor increases from 67 to 70.5.
  The share of cardiovascular and nervous system diseases is growing in this part.
  In this regard, the right choice of clothes is very important for the body's temperature regulation.
Autumn is the shortest weather in Gyumri - 67 days.
  It is divided into three sub-seasons: autumn t <15 0C, golden autumn - 5-10 0C, end of autumn - up to 5 0C.
Light autumn (about 40%) and cloudy daytime (up to 5%) are typical in summer (10%).
  The body's resistance begins to decrease. There is a lack of vitamins and necessary micronutrients.
  Various diseases of the nervous and cardiovascular systems are activated (increases by 30%).
It is very important to specify the dates of wearing seasonal clothes in Gyumri, their location.
  The wrong choice of clothes can contribute to the disease of the population.
 In Gyumri, the population wears warm hand clothes (large 4.5 kg) from the first ten days of November to the first half of March, for about 96 days.
 The population wears winter clothes (3.0-3.5 kg) for more than 2 months.
Spring-autumn clothes can be worn from mid-April to late May-late September to the first ten days of November.
  Light (1.5-2 kg) Summer light clothes (up to 1 kg) are worn for 122 days, from May 31 to September 30 [1, pp. 18-21].
  The right choice of seasonal clothes reduces the risk of getting sick.
  In addition, in the case of normal thermal insulation, comfortable clothing, the efficiency of a person is higher, he can do any job effectively.
A similar medical-geographical study can be done for other cities of the republic և the medical-geographical picture of the climatic conditions of all urban settlements will be obtained.
Literature 1. Valesyan A., Medical-geographical assessment of the ecological condition of Gyumri, Yerevan, 2004.
Kima Davtyan MEDICAL-GEOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION OF GYUMRI CLIMATE Keywords: Disease, climate, humidity, medical-geographical description, climate, weather, temperature, atmospheric pressure, wind, precipitation.
