POLITICAL PARTICIPATION IS THE MOST IMPORTANT PRECONDITION FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF DEMOCRACY AND CIVIL SOCIETY.
  "Political participation" means the participation of people, citizens in political life, politics, political activity.
Attention has been paid to the fact of people's participation in political life since ancient times.
 Speaking about politics, Aristotle considered politics to be unique in its interaction between people, arguing that political communication presupposes the relationship of individuals to the state as the interaction of individual particles with society as a whole.
  Aristotle states that man is a socio-political being who always strives for a common life.
 According to him, man always has the requirements to rule and obey 2.
Participation in political life requires additional work, knowledge, material resources, psychological training necessary for competition, etc.
  In the current processes of modernization, there are two main approaches to political participation: liberal and conservative.
  Proponents of liberalism argue that expanding democratic political participation is a reliable measure of the legitimacy of political power, the best way to maintain the mutual security of rival political parties.
Proponents of conservatism see the escalation of political participation as a threat to undermining the foundations of national unity and the system.
  They believe that the scale of political participation should be minimized; political decisions should be made by people who are more informed, able to follow the line of political development.
Political participation is seen as the involvement of members of society in political relations on an individual, class, ethnic, religious or other basis, in political life, participation in political decision-making and implementation processes based on interests, concerns and goals3.
1 See Aristotle, Sochineniya, Moscow, 1983, vol. 4, pp. 376-383.
2 See ibid.
3 Shapaghatyan H., Current issues of political participation, Yerevan, 2007, pp. 16-17.
The involvement of people in political processes is unequivocal.
 Some members of the society are actively involved in political life, are most interested in the processes taking place, and some members of the society are not interested in them.
 Some participate neither actively nor passively in political life.
  20th century Since the last decade, many countries have been looking for new mechanisms to increase citizen involvement in governance initiatives, governance processes, from the creation of decentralized institutions to the use of multiple forms of participatory consulting.
  In general, development initiatives are successful if they are implemented with the involvement and active participation of citizens.
  Participation makes policies more sensitive to the needs of the poor and programs more effective.
When talking about "civic involvement" և "participation", it should be noted that they are often used as mutually interchangeable concepts, ie they are almost identical.
 In this case, it is difficult to make a clear distinction between the content of these concepts.
  According to a number of approaches, the notion of "participation" is viewed as part of the notion of "civic engagement" in its most intensively organized form.
  The issue of measuring their feasibility and actual manifestations is urgent in the implementation of the policy of participation in development initiatives, concepts that are part of them - civic engagement.
As a rule, there are two forms of political participation: active and passive.
  In the case of the passive, people receive information or advice, participate in the process, but there is no mutual connection.
Another type is participation for the sake of material incentives.
 In this case, the community gathers, material support is provided, people participate for material incentives.
Political participation is expressed in two ways: direct and representative.
  Elections and rallies are the forms of direct participation.
 During the representative participation, the masses elect their representatives - deputies, officials - authorized persons to exercise their political power, to represent their interests.
Democracy is realized when citizens are actively committed to political life.
  The active participation of citizens in the governance of the state is one of the main principles of the establishment of civil society.
  The Universal Declaration of Human Rights states: "Everyone has the right to take part in the government of his country, directly or through freely chosen representatives.
  The will of the people must be the basis of the government. ”1
  The expression of civic will is the basis of democracy.
 However, let us mention the reasons why citizens do not participate in public life: • They do not believe in the results of what they have done, 1 "Universal Declaration of Human Rights", 10.12.1948, Article 4.
• Public life does not affect their personal life. • These questions seem complicated.
Describing the concepts of civic engagement և participation, let us try to give their definitions.
 Civic engagement is defined as the participation of individuals in public life, which takes place through direct or indirect interactions between civil society organizations, large sections of citizens, the state, multidisciplinary institutions and businesses, in order to influence decision-making or pursue common goals.
  It is a process that unites և organizes the citizens or the representatives entrusted by them to "influence, shape և control the public problems," development initiatives, their implementation and resources "1.
According to the UN (Glossary) definition, participation is a development or governance approach in which the key stakeholders of politeness or intervention are involved in the process of defining issues և priorities and significantly overseeing the planning and implementation of projects2.
According to a report by the British INTRAC Training and Research Center to the Ministry of International Development in the United Kingdom of Northern Ireland, participation is viewed as a broad concept that has been widely interpreted.
  Not intending to give a clear clear definition of this concept, the report states that it is not a technical or scientific concept; it should be considered as a principle of development policies, organization and motivation of practices.
  The MDG technical records on participation present four key elements of participation: information, consultation, partnership, oversight3.
Participation can be varied.
 It can be manifested in: • In different spheres (political, social, economic, etc.), • In different ways (direct-indirect), • In different ways (depending on the degree of its organization, from sanctions to the formation of stable civil society entities), • To varying depths (ie, the degree to which civil society actors are able to penetrate government և to participate in the decision-making process itself), • To varying degrees of involvement (including more diverse groups in the participation process, expanding participation to include governing constituencies with different characteristics ), 2 See www.un.org.
• In terms of impact (within the framework of the project, development plan և policy), • Aiming at a particular object (according to which attribute of a particular action to which the participatory action relates), the subject (problem to be identified and solved), • Specific subjects through 1.
The participatory process goes through three stages: preparation, strengthening, institutionalization.
Participatory mechanisms can be enshrined in law, forcing the government or its individual structures to involve public actors in this or that public policy process.
 In general, participation becomes meaningless as long as those in power do not allow others to participate in the process of setting priorities, decision-making, resource management and control.
  Civic participation, as a voluntary step outside, helps to build solidarity and strengthen democratic governance.
  Citizens' participation in development processes leads to the implementation of more effective, sustainable programs, giving participants a "sense of ownership", making local experience and priorities part of project selection and design.
When talking about the relationship between the concepts of "civic engagement" and "participation", it is necessary to take into account that the concept of "civic engagement" is broader than "participation", ie participation is one of the most active manifestations of civic engagement.
 Participation is an effort to create conditions that can help empower members of society և groups who have less control over the forces that condition their lives2.
Non-governmental organizations are also important in terms of increasing the level of citizen participation.
  By joining non-governmental organizations, citizens actively participate in public life.
Speaking of political participation, we can not but refer to the disabled.
  The level of their participation is quite low.
For many disabled people in our country, the primary problem is the knowledge of their rights and the opportunity to use them.
 Today, some of the NGOs are engaged in the protection of the legal rights of the disabled.
  The time has come for the disabled to integrate into society, to take an active part in public life.
It should be noted that the involvement of citizens in political life depends on the specific situation, the nature of the political system, as a person.
 Man himself creates a political existence through his own political activity իր through his behavior in the society.
1 "Guide to Participatory Activity", Yerevan, 2004, pp. 23-24.
The level of political culture of the society has a significant impact on the nature and direction of political participation1, which is reflected in the acceptance and perception of democratic values ​​և institutions.
 From this we can assume that the higher the democratic values ​​in the public consciousness, the higher the level of political participation.
 And on the contrary, the lower the degree of importance of democratic rights and freedoms, the more sympathy and alienation is observed among the population's alienation from political life.
Excessive involvement in political life contributes to nervous tension.
  On the other hand, the long-term alienation of people from power creates an inability to fulfill their own demands, extremist tendencies, and so on.
  The reasons for involving people in political participation may be different.
 In general, people interested in politics are a minority.
  Most people are indifferent to politics.
These people lose their faith in their own opportunities, they think that nothing can change in politics with their participation.
 Disappointed with the promises made by political parties, they are automatically alienated from politics.
The reasons for non-participation are explained by the insufficient activity of the political and social system, which contributes to the alienation of a certain part of the people from politics, that is, insufficient active forces in the society, which are able to stimulate everyone's activity.
The non-participation of people in political life is generally not considered a positive phenomenon.
  This does not give any reason to consider non-participation in political life in all cases unacceptable "inappropriate for civilized life".
  The phenomenon of non-participation is quite common nowadays, especially in democracies.
It should be noted that non-participation is assessed as ambiguous.
 Many see it as a threat to the stability of society, a negative phenomenon threatening the state, a tendency to diminish the legitimacy of the government, while others view it as an expression of the development of a civil society independent of the state.
  It proves the existence of democratic freedom of the population, the possibility of its own behavior towards politics.
In general, democracy, democracy, non-participation, refusal of citizens to participate, are poorly combined.
  That is why the society emphasizes the active participation of each member - the involvement in the socio-political life, because only with active participation is the overcoming of the gap between the people and the government - the establishment of democratic countries.
2 Shapaghatyan H., page 116.
Arnak Sargsyan POLITICAL PARTICIPATION IS THE MOST IMPORTANT PRECONDITION FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF DEMOCRACY AND CIVIL SOCIETY Keywords: political participation, non-participation, democracy, civil society, political society, civil society
