THE EVOLUTION OF US POLITICS AFTER THE SECOND WORLD WAR IN IRAN (BEFORE THE ISLAMIC REVOLUTION 1978-1979) After World War II, a new world situation was created with a new balance of power.
  The victory of the USSR was a stimulus for the influence of socialism մեծ to increase the fame, which caused a rift in the anti-fascist coalition.
  At the initiative of Britain and the United States, the terms "Soviet threat" and "threat to the USSR" began to circulate.
The ways of foreign policy development changed essentially.
From the 18th century, US political concepts were "passive" in nature. The doctrine of "isolation" (end of the 18th century - 1930s), one of the founders of which is J. Washington restricted and prevented the United States from being active in foreign policy, in international conflicts.
  The "Monroe Doctrine" (1823), which is the next stage in the development of the "Doctrine of Isolation", is already characterized by imperialist motives and is more localized in Latin America, including it in the spheres of US influence.
 19th century from the end of the 20th century. From the beginning, American imperialism received a new platform of activity - the doctrine of "open doors", which was aimed at Asia 2.
Examining US political doctrines before World War II, we are convinced that they paved the way for a qualitative change in US foreign policy after the end of the war.
At the beginning of World War II (September 4, 1939, then June 26, 1941), Iran expressed its official stance on the war, declaring it "neutral" 3 but the subsequent hostilities, the growing pro-German sentiment in the country, the interest of the ruling elite in Germany's plans 41 The doctrine put forward Ջ Ջ Kenan, who in 1945-1947. He held the position of Counselor of the US Embassy in the USSR.
  He later summarized his ideas and thoughts in the term "doctrine of containment" that armed US foreign policy.
  Kenan was convinced that the existence of the Soviet regime depended on foreign policy, so by proposing to hinder the further progress and development of the USSR, it would be possible to put an end to the communist regime.
 See Rubin B., Secrets of States, NY, 2013, p. 43.
4 See Agayev S., German Imperialism in Iran, Moscow, 1969, p. 26.
They were a major obstacle to maintaining neutrality.
  The obvious German orientation of the Iranian elite ումը The strengthening of the German position in the country became the reason that in 1941 ․ On August 25, 1945, Soviet troops entered Iran from the north and British troops from the south and west1.
Using the right of Britain և USSR ally, the US sends troops to Iran2.
The Iranian elite, losing the support of Germany, begins to look for an ally, the growing US was the best candidate3.
 After World War II, the United States began to take active steps to involve Iran in its sphere of influence.
  The US provided financial and military assistance to Iran4.
The most important place occupied by Iran in the US foreign policy spectrum is conditioned by "economic and military factors" 5 First, Iran's vast oil reserves were needed by Iran amid unreliable forecasts around its mines6.
  In addition, World War II ended with the US-USSR intensifying the Cold War and dividing the world, so it became possible to have a military base on the USSR border7.
1947 In a speech to Congress on March 12, 2006, US President Harry Truman endorsed the idea of ​​US aid to Greece and Turkey, as they were under the "threat of communism" and urgently needed help.
 H. Truman was based on the idea that communism, once established in those countries, would spread, expand its "totalitarian" structure, and those countries would not be able to withstand Soviet aggression and pressure, so the application of the doctrine of restraint would be manifested in material aid to those countries. which would give those countries a strong basis for "resisting the Soviet threat."
Greece և Turkey received $ 400 million in aid9.
1947 In June, the United States sold large quantities of military equipment to Iran10, for the purchase of which Iran was provided with a $ 10 million loan11, which allowed the United States to strengthen its military presence with the help of the Iranian army. the tendency to turn to the USA, because in that way it is possible to maneuver the "USSR" of England.
 See Orlov E., Foreign Policy of Iran after the Second World War, Moscow, 1975, p. 59.
9 It should be noted that Greece and Turkey were under the auspices of the United Kingdom, but at the urging of the United States, Britain ceded that right to the United States.
 The motives of the policy of such an attitude of England were several ․ Britain was "anxious" about the growing influence of socialism in the USSR, it was a political ploy to avoid criticism of Britain for its intervention in Greece.
  See "History of Diplomacy", under ed. А. Gromyko et al., Vol. 5, kn. 1, Moscow, 1974, p. 249.
11 The main purpose of this loan, at least, was to equip the Iranian army with American military equipment at a high level, as the amount of military equipment significantly exceeded the needs of Iran, and the real price of that equipment was 10 million.
 See Bashkirkov A., p. 111.
Mar.
  This was the basis in 1947. The signing of the Iran-US military agreement on October 6, 2006, which referred to a number of terms of the US military mission and the loan.
  The agreement was aimed at ensuring US monopoly on Iran's military, excluding any third party interference in Iran's military affairs.
  Under Article 24 of the agreement, the Iranian government was prohibited from using the services of other countries' advisers without consulting the US government to carry out any military action during the term of the agreement1.
  Later, the contract was regularly extended: the Iranian army reports directly to the US Department of Defense.
The strong positions gained in the military sphere were a huge potential for further US intervention in Iran's domestic and foreign policy, as evidenced by the dominance of the American element in the formulation of the "7-year development plan for Iran" 2.
  1946 In December 1947, on the basis of a contract signed between the Iranian government and the American company Morrison-Nadson, the engineers of that company arrived in Iran. presented a report on Iran's 7-year development plan.
  For the implementation of this program, a financial base was provided beyond Iran's financial capabilities, which would allow the United States to further expand its assistance to Iran.
 1949 On February 15, the program was approved3.
The American version of Iran's development plan was a significant step towards Iran-US rapprochement, as the United States was able to use this program to maximize Iran's "development" activities on the basis of American imperialism և its interests ․ It was planned to build railways, airports, highways, means of communication, the scale of which significantly exceeded the needs and capabilities of Iran.
In the current situation, US President H. Truman in 1949 On January 20, 1945, he launched a program aimed at assisting backward countries4.
 This program clarified and localized the content of the Truman Doctrine, moving it to dependent countries on the brink of colonization.
  In the case of Iran, the fourth phase of the Truman program was significant, according to which the United States used its own technical or financial achievements to serve the economic growth of underdeveloped countries.
 Based on this point, the US provided huge sums of money to Iran to stabilize the country's political and economic situation.
For further rapprochement between Iran and the United States, the 1950s were necessary. The agreement on the provision of technical assistance to Iran for the development of agriculture, signed on October 19, 1945, according to which special agricultural exhibition centers were to be established in Iran, which would later be spread throughout the country.
 Taking into account the financial and economic situation in Iran 2 The United States considered the acquisition of significant levers in the economic and financial spheres as a possible weapon for its final strengthening in Iran and its involvement in its sphere of influence.
This is evidenced by the two US financial missions, led by Milspo, which, using financial privileges, were able to obtain the necessary basis for managing the internal life of the country.
 The 7-year development plan of Iran made it possible to "direct" the main guidelines of the program to the United States, removing Britain from the control of Iran's internal life.
The United States took over the process of organizing, managing, providing these centers with specialists, equipment, and medical facilities1.
Thus, the situation created after the Second World War, the United States was able to use as much as possible to create the basis for the implementation of foreign policy concepts, political, strategic, economic large-scale plans under their veil.
The strengthening of the US position in Iran went hand in hand with the narrowing of British influence.
  The struggle against British imperialism and the presence of the British element in the country could have gained momentum in Iran for the United States.
1950s The basis of British imperialism in Iran was the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company2, which continued to enrich the British treasury with huge financial resources.
  The US ambitions for Iranian oil were the basis of Milspo's two missions, which failed, but in the 1950s. The necessary political and economic environment was created for the United States.
1951 On March 15, the Majlis passed a law on the nationalization of Iran's oil industry, which was approved by the Senate five days later3.
 The United States contributed to the passage of this law, as it dealt a direct blow to the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company4.
  The implementation of the law on the nationalization of Iranian oil was the basis of the program of the national bourgeoisie.
1951-1953 The national bourgeoisie led by Dr. Mohammad Mosadegh came to power in Iran.
 Mossadegh, in the first phase of his rule, focused on the implementation of the law on the nationalization of the Iranian oil industry, viewed the United States as a possible ally, an aide in the seizure of Iranian oil from the Anglo-Iranian oil company.
 Thus, in parallel with the strict, uncompromising policy towards England, a rather flexible "soft policy" was pursued towards the United States, the repercussions of which were maintained until the end of the Mossadegh government5.
 However, he was not going to limit the whole process of nationalization of Iran's oil industry by replacing England with the United States.
  Mossadegh's domestic-foreign policy concept was called "negative nationalism" by the Shah, based on "negative balance" 6, which presupposes the maintenance of neutrality in foreign policy, which Mossadegh considered a guarantee of maintaining Iran's independence and sovereignty.
  Mossadegh's "negative nationalism" was in conflict with Shah's "positive nationalism", which presupposed foreign policy instability և variability based on self-interest.
  Mossadegh քաղաքական Shah's political views 2 Anglo-Persian oil company in 1935 renamed the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company (established in 1909 on the basis of an oil concession granted to the British D'Arcy).
One of the evidences of the policy of tolerance towards the USA can be considered the application of Truman's point 4 in Iran, on the basis of which the volume of financial aid to Iran was not only reduced, but significantly increased after the approval of the national bourgeois government.
 See Stamboltsyan A., p. 50.
6 Ibid., P.
The obvious difference of categories was observed in the process of nationalization of the oil industry.
  Shah, criticizing Mossadegh's extreme policy, opposed it with his point of view ․ In his own words, he fully agreed with the idea of ​​the law of nationalization of Iranian oil, but was convinced that it should be achieved through negotiations with Britain, which Mossadegh accepted with extreme intolerance.
Still in 1949 ․ In November, Shah left for the United States, where he discussed with Truman and Achison various aspects of financial and economic aid to Iran.
  Mohammad Reza H. He discusses with Truman the need for a number of economic reforms in Iran, which should be implemented at the expense of Iranian oil revenues2.
1951 H. Truman has a secret meeting with the representatives of England.
  Several aspects of the future of Iranian oil are being discussed.
 H. Truman addresses Mossadegh, expressing concern over the Iran-Britain conflict, while calling on Mossadegh to find an alternative to the interests of Iran, which seeks to nationalize oil, given Britain's interests in the global oil economy.
The United States, Britain and Britain announced a joint boycott of Iranian oil, blocked its export routes, and suspended the Anglo-Iranian oil company.
  The United States wanted to find a way to resolve the issue, which, by narrowing Britain's position in the exploitation of Iranian oil, would allow the United States to reach that vital resource, which was conditioned by the US proposals for oil exploration4.
  Mossadegh showed its determination on the oil issue, rejecting all the received offers.
With the Shah as its political backbone, his immediate entourage, the country's backward forces, seeing no other way to reach an agreement with Mossadegh, the United States is organizing a coup against Mossadegh.
  However, official Washington does not deny its direct participation5.
 J. Dulles stated at the press conference that the USA considers it impossible to deal with Mossadegh6.
  1954 In April, the Iranian oil dispute ended.
They formed 8 monopolies of the West in the International Consortium, where 40% belonged to American companies.
  In addition, in 1955 Iran entered into the Baghdad Pact7, which did not include the United States8, but had a direct impact on its activities, economic and military programs9.
7 Iran was considered not only a member of the Baghdad Pact, but also a possible link between the Covenant member states, so Iran's membership in the Pact, and the subsequent policy pursued by Mohammad Reza Shah within its framework, received much attention from the US Government.
 See 8 An important circumstance was that the idea of ​​creating the Baghdad Pact belonged to Dalles, which speaks to the American interest in the creation of the Pact and its further activities.
 See Tuganova O., International Relations in the Near and Middle East, Moscow, 1967, p. 45.
1960s Domestic political developments in Iran have affected US-Iran relations Ի Mohammad Reza Shah undertook a number of reforms in various spheres of domestic life, which he called the White Revolution.
 The reform program, which was a direct response of the Shah to Kennedy's foreign policy doctrine, improved the country's economic situation, as a result of which Iran gained great independence in foreign policy.
 Close relations with the United States continued, as Shah considered the United States to be "a sincere and close friend of Iran" 3, but in those relations the positions of Iran and the United States began to equalize.
  Probably the best proof of that is the cessation of US financial assistance to Iran4.
 President Nixon's foreign policy concept was beginning to be used by major allies in the Third World.
The socio-political situation in Iran after the White Revolution is indirectly based on the 1970s. For the Islamic Revolution.
  Ության ած who presided over the United States on the eve of the revolution Ջ ած The cards did not propose a weighty format for US-Iran relations6.
 During his rule, the momentum transmitted to Iran-US relations by the Nixon Doctrine continued by inertia.
The revolution, conditioned by a number of economic, political and social preconditions7, changed the US-Iran relations: "By the force of Nixon doctrine, the US position in the Middle East was shaken, which is why it is called an" earthquake "in US political circles8.
Shah, with his domestic economic and political activities, wanted to make Iran a powerful capitalist country, the "cradle of high civilization" 9, but as a result of the inadequacy of the existing basis for its implementation in that policy, the mass protests of the masses turned into a revolution.
1978-1979 ԱՄՆ US views on further policy in Iran changed qualitatively during the revolution ․ At the beginning of the revolution, the United States was adamant in defending Shah իշխան's power, but, convinced of its impossibility, the United States began to do enough. 2 Domestic political developments in Iran, according to US foreign policy, required US intervention, so the State Department ․ Bowling, who has paid a number of visits to Iran, presents Kennedy with several options for resolving the issue in order to respond to the situation properly.
  See Zonis M., ATheory of Revolution From Accounts of the Revolution, from World Politics, Vol. 35, № 4, Jul., 1983, pp. 586-606.
5 Alvandi R., Diplomatic History, Nixon, Kissinger, and the Shah.
 The Origins of Iranian Primacy in the Persian Gulf, 7 See "Iranian Revolution", ed. А. Арабаджяна, Москва, 1989, pp. 26-56, can make optimistic predictions about the future relations between Khomeini and Islamic Iran 1.
1979 The US embassy in Tehran was closed on November 4, 2010, discouraging US politicians who were in favor of a lenient policy toward Iran.
 The seizure of the embassy caused a stir around the world, leading to the severance of US-Iran diplomatic relations in 1980. on April 7.
Examining the US policy in Iran, we see that using the preconditions existing after the Second World War, the US was taking active steps to strengthen its position in Iran.
  The foreign policy direction was found in political doctrines, in which the cornerstone concept received new manifestations.
 US policy in Iran brings Iran-US relations to an alliance of two equal states, under which the evolution of the Shah's political authority is even more evident.
  Iran's strength for the United States is confirmed from both economic, military and political points of view, so the United States used all means to keep Iran in its sphere of influence.
 During the Islamic Revolution, the United States changed its "course of action" in parallel with the evolution of events, so the United States decided to "think about what is unthinkable" 2, but this policy was not successful, leading to the overthrow of long-standing US policy in Iran.
Angelina Gabrielyan: THE EVOLUTION OF US POLITICS IN IRAN AFTER THE SECOND WORLD WAR (UNTIL 1978-1979 ISLAMIC REVOLUTION: Foreign Interest, Foreign Relations
