The center of gravity surveys ARDYUNKNERIHAMADRUME MAGNISATELURAKAN AND DEPTH KARUTSVATSKIUSUMNASIRMAN we separated the central part of the NPATAKOVUsumnasirutyunneri, which includes Lake Sevan Aragats volcanic zangvatseev Geghama volcanic plateau in their surrounding areas.
The area adjacent to the Lake Sanaa catchment area is a triangular depression surrounded by high mountains, which is a large intermountain tectonic depression.
  The Lake Sana'a basin has not only a complex geomorphological but also a complex tectonic structure.
 The analysis of the results of geological-geophysical researches shows that different parts of the San basin have a unique geological structure, different hydrogeological conditions connected with it.
Aragats volcanic massif is the largest complex structure in the Central Volcanic Zone of Armenia.
 Mount Ara volcano rises in the northern part of Yeghvard plateau in the eastern part of Aragats volcanic region.
 Compared to Aragats, it has a simpler structure, a shorter period of activity, and intense winds indicate the older height of the volcano.
Geghama volcanic plateau occupies the central part of the newest volcanic zone in Armenia within the mountain range of the same name [1].
  The lava-pyroclastic formations of the Lower Pliocene-Upper Neo-Pleistocene basalt-trachibasalt-trachiandesitic composition are more widespread within the Geghama mountain range.
Active tectonic processes in the territory of the Republic of Armenia during the last 10 million years, including the Pliocene-Holocene period, have been accompanied by intensive basaltic volcanism, leading to the formation of effusive sedimentary mass formations.
  On the other hand, according to the data of geothermal studies [9], an increase of temperature gradient և heat flux density is observed within the borders of the republic.
 These other geological features testify to the still extinct tectonic activity in this area.
1. Magnetic fiber extraction results.
  Numerous works have been carried out in the territory of the Republic of Armenia by different geophysical methods to compile the geoelectric model of the subsoil.
For the geological section of the RA subsoil, as well as for the studies of the sedimentary layer, magnetic-wire probing works were carried out in about 70 sounding points, covering mainly the central area of ​​the RA.
 At the probing points, the components of magnetic field, magnetic field, magnetic-electric voltage were determined by means of electromagnetic waves at intervals of 4-400 seconds, through which the resistances were determined according to the depth.
  Based on the obtained results, the geoelectric model of the RA subsoil was constructed, the values ​​of longitudinal electrical conductivity (S = h / P) for the mentioned area were determined according to the depths (using the condition P = const), քարտեզ a map of electrical conductions was made, where the changes in electrical conductivity of rocks are clearly presented.
  As can be seen from the map, the central area of ​​Armenia is characterized by the transverse elongation of the ellipsoids, which differs significantly from the general elongation of the North-South Caucasus.
  The interpretation of the magnetic field probing was performed by combining the field data և digital modeling using the longitudinal conduction map of the sediment-volcanic layer of Armenia [4] և the region in general [7].
Figure 1. Longitudinal power transmission map for the central part of the Republic of Armenia [4] The analysis of the longitudinal power transmission map shows that within Armenia, the upper heterogeneous layer can be approximated to an extended communication structure 50 km wide, 150 km long with և 400 Sim average transmission.
  Areas with the same values ​​of conductivity were separated on the map by isosceles, according to which 5 zones were separated.
In the central part of the Republic of Armenia allocated for our study, two of these zones are mainly included.
  In the central-eastern parts of the central part, relatively large longitudinal conductors (500 SIM) and a zone with relatively lower electrical conductivity (200 SIM) are distinguished (Fig. 1).
Large values ​​of longitudinal conductivity indicate the presence of a relatively strong complex of sedimentary rocks.
2. Gravity extraction data.
  The territory of the Republic of Armenia as a whole is characterized by negative values ​​of the gravitational field (in the Bouguer correction).
  The preliminary delimitation of the gravitational field for the territory of the Lesser Caucasus was carried out in E. By Ajimamudov [2], who described the area as a first-class anomaly, two gravitational maxima, northeast-southwest, which are separated by a central minimum.
  At first glance, these zones coincide spatially with the tectonic zones, about which K. is presented. Paffengoltsi [10], A. Aslanyan [3], A. In the works of Gabrielyan [5].
  More detailed gravimetric studies were carried out by Sh. Hovhannisyan [2], L. Tadosyan [11] և by others, who gave a more detailed and clear picture of the gravitational field.
Regional gravitational field, according to A. Martirosyan gravitational field anomaly map is characterized by several relative maxima և minimums.
  The regional zones of the relative maximum of the Middle Araks, Alaverdi-Ijani, Goris-Kapan are distinguished, which differ from each other in the intensity, size and elongation of the anomaly.
  The central zone is characterized by a decrease in the values ​​of gravity, ie regional gravitational minimums in those highlands (Aragats L., Geghama-Vardenis mountain ranges) և in the intermountain depressions (Lake Sana) correspond to the earth.
The distribution of the iso-anomalies of the force of gravity of the central minimum has a mosaic appearance.
When looking at the central part of the Republic of Armenia, it appears from the map of gravitational field anomalies (Fig. 2) that its eastern-western regions are characterized by gravitational minimums, and between them there are relatively higher gravitational force values.
The territory of the Republic of Armenia is mostly characterized by negative values ​​of gravity anomalies, the explanations of their existence are very complicated, especially in mountainous regions.
 Analyzing the possible reasons for the negative gravity force proposed by different authors, it can be generalized as follows: either the gravitational minimums due to the increase in the strength of the granite layer, consequently the increase in the strength of the lower layer than the basalt layer, or related to the Mokhorovichic boundary position.
(megalo) Figure 2. Map of gravitational field anomalies for the central part of the Republic of Armenia [8] 3. Comparison of the results of magnetic ուր gravitational extractions.
  For the central part of the Republic of Armenia, we have the following picture with magnetic fiber extracts. Its eastern and western regions are characterized by large values ​​of longitudinal conductivity (500 SIM), and their intermediate area by relatively small values ​​(200 SIM).
  As the high values ​​of longitudinal electrical conductivity indicate the presence of a relatively strong sedimentary complex, it is implied that there is a layer of high-strength sedimentary rocks in the eastern-western regions of the central part.
  On the other hand, according to the data of gravitational extraction, relatively more intense gravitational negative anomalies (gravitational minimums) are registered in the eastern West regions of the central part.
Since the existence of gravitational minima may be due to various factors, and according to the magnetic field data, there is a relatively strong sedimentary layer in the eastern and western parts, comparing the gravitational magnetic field data, we can say that the existence of gravitational minima may be related to sedimentary with the presence of the complex և the latter circumstance should also be included in the geological interpretation of the anomaly.
Literature 1. Jrbashyan R., Fundamentals of Volcanology ագույն The Modern Volcanism of Armenia, Yerevan, 2013, pp. 83-86, 87-89.
Territories of the Armenian SSR, “Izv. АН АрмССР.
 Earth Sciences ”, 1979, № 5, p. 58-63.gravimetric data, “Ex. AN ArmSSR ”.
 geologist. and geographer. Science, 1961, p. 14, № 5, Elya SahakyanMAGNISATELURAKAN gravity surveys ARDYUNKNERIHAMADRUME AND CENTRAL PART OF DEPTH KARUTSVATSKIUSUMNASIRMAN NPATAKOVBanali words, magnisatelurakan extraction, longitudinal electrical, gravity extraction, anomaly gravity field, gravity minimum (maximum), negative gravity anomaly.
