THE EFFECT OF TECHNOGENIC POLLUTION ON THE ENVIRONMENT ON HUMAN ECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS The use of natural resources by man has now reached enormous proportions.
 At the end of the twentieth century, world industrial production increased 16 times, oil consumption increased by more than 100, and aluminum - almost 2000, steel - 25, energy - 11 times.
 The extraction of minerals from the earth's crust reaches 100 billion tons annually.
  The volume of industrial production is growing, և the current raw material resources are already four times the amount used during the whole period of human civilization.
As a result, the amount of anthropogenically harmful substances penetrating the atmosphere, soil and water, which pose a huge threat to natural ecosystems and humans, has increased unspeakably.
  By penetrating the air, harmful substances are released into the soil or water over time with solid particles or atmospheric precipitation.
  In this way, pollution of soil, water and vegetation significantly affects ecosystems.
  "Acid rains" have a devastating effect on aquatic terrestrial ecosystems.
  As a result, the latter are deprived of the opportunity to clean themselves and neutralize toxic substances.
The impact of polluted air on the human body can be direct.
 In this case, the solid particles (toxic gases) are inhaled into the airways, lungs, causing their irritation, weakening the body's resistance to airborne infections, which can lead to outbreaks of influenza and other diseases.
The situation is not encouraging in the field of renewable resources.
 The total annual loss of arable lands currently reaches 15 million, most of the cultivated lands do not meet the required chemical indicators with their sanitary-health norms.
  It is difficult to accurately assess the effects of chemical soil contamination on the health of the population, but improper chemical treatment of arable land near settlements. Pollution is extremely dangerous for the health of the population.
The annual loss of forests reaches more than 20 million hectares.
  The mass of atmospheric oxygen is reduced by 10 billion tons annually.
  About 40% of the steady flow of rivers in the world is consumed every year.
Thus, the unprecedented progress of the growing technical and energy consumption of human society has created the need to use unspeakable amounts of mineral and biological resources.
As a result, the natural environment is undergoing enormous changes unfavorable for the development of society, as a result of which a real threat of a global ecological crisis has been created.
  The sharp deterioration of the natural environment of our planet is closely connected with the mistakes made in the economic and ecological policies in different countries, the insufficient level of technical development, as well as the insufficient study of the anthropogenic impact on the natural environment.
 The process of environmental distortion in the Republic of Armenia, in case of intensive exploitation of natural resources, pollution of the atmosphere, water, land, industrial and vehicle wastes, combined with difficult mountainous terrain, water scarcity, low soil conditions, population density and various diseases. .
The gaseous composition of the atmosphere is one of the most important indicators of the purity of the natural environment, on which depends not only the existence of man, but also of all living systems of the biosphere.
  Atmospheric contaminants may contain particulate matter of mineral or organic origin, including plant pollen, spores, microorganisms, etc.
  Due to volcanic eruptions, winds and storms, they rise to great heights and fall down, occupying huge distances.
Mineral dust, depending on its source, has a different chemical composition.
  Mineral dust formed by wind-blown rock formations contains a large amount of aluminum և iron oxides, calcium salts և etc.
  As a result of fires, particles of wood are introduced into these mixtures, resulting in organic matter resulting from malnutrition.
  Phenolic compounds with mutagenic and carcinogenic properties may be present in them.
  Oxides of sulfur, nitrogen, carbon, as well as chlorine penetrate the atmosphere.
 Nitrogen-soluble compounds are also included in plant synthesizers.
 Even small amounts of ischloride can have a noticeable destructive effect on ozone levels in the upper atmosphere.
During the maturation of licorice spores, as well as during the flowering of high-quality plants, the content of spores and pollen in the terrestrial layer significantly increases, as a result of which a significant increase in allergenic diseases is observed among the population.
  This is especially noticeable among people who have left their homes; the vegetation and landscape descriptions in the area are significantly different from their ethnic areas.
  The frequency and severity of such diseases in recent years is explained by the general weakening of the immune system of the population, which is inextricably linked to the increase in the overall pollution of the natural environment.
The mentioned natural sources of atmospheric mixtures on our planet have always been.
 However, due to natural balance regulatory mechanisms, they have not had a significant impact on ecological systems.
  Due to the activation of the anthropogenic factor, the emissions of many hazardous mixtures have now changed significantly, exceeding the background level in some parts of the Earth by hundreds or even thousands of times.
  These mixtures contain a huge amount of toxic substances, posing a great danger to both living systems and humans.
The main source of man-made pollution of the atmosphere is the combustion of energy, which results in the formation of huge amounts of carbon dioxide particles.
 At high temperatures due to combustion, nitrogen oxidizes air nitrogen, increasing the content of these substances in the atmosphere.
  Industrial enterprises (vehicles) emit chemicals into the atmosphere that did not exist in nature at all, and during evolution no mechanism has been developed for the neutralization of such substances in living organisms.
Anthropogenically, 7 billion carbon dioxide is emitted into the atmosphere annually, which is 2% of the total mass of natural carbon dioxide circulating in the biosphere.
 However, this quantity becomes additional և is not related to plants.
  As a result, there has been a steady increase in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere in recent decades, which has created a "greenhouse effect" on the planet.
Many fuels contain large amounts of sulfur.
 In high temperature conditions, sulfur produces oxides, which are then converted to weak sulfuric sulfuric acids.
  They, when mixed with nitrogen-nitric acids in the atmosphere, form "acid rain", which significantly harms ecosystems.
  They especially damage the green mass of plants, reduce the assimilation capacity of the hosts և resistance to viral and fungal diseases.
 Such rains cause irritation of the respiratory tract and skin of people, revealing asthmatic phenomena.
  Heavy metals, including lead and mercury, are dangerous to human health.
 Lead mainly penetrates into the atmosphere from metallurgical plants, accumulator companies.
  The entry of lead particles into the atmosphere from cars is estimated at 4 thousand annually. t.
  Mercury emissions are made from companies that produce mercury-containing devices using mercury technology.
The development of the chemical industry հատկապես, especially the widespread use of organic synthesis technologies, has led to the orphanage of 2-3 thousand species of new substances per year, which did not exist in nature before.
 Some of them are neutral, but a large percentage of highly toxic substances, whose natural mechanisms of decomposition are absent, their decomposition and neutralization can take hundreds of years.
Man-made emissions have a very negative effect on the agronomic systems of natural plant systems.
 Under the influence of sulfur dioxide, the photosynthetic tissues of plant hosts are destroyed.
 Under these conditions, agricultural crops undergo negative changes of qualitative and quantitative nature.
  Accumulations of sulfur pose a risk of soil acidification, which significantly affects crop yields.
Fluorine and chlorine compounds are incomparably toxic to plants.
Fluorine compounds accumulate in the hosts, causing the plants to dry out.
  The toxic effect of chlorine compounds on plants is manifested by a decrease in their growth due to soil salinization.
  Under such conditions, the yield of crops decreases by 30-50%.
 Excess or lack of fluoride has a negative effect on the human body.
  Its insufficient content contributes to the increase of the solubility of dental plaque and the occurrence of caries.
 In different countries, including Armenia, some of the population does not receive the necessary amount of fluoride, which leads to various dental diseases.
  Fluoride deficiency can lead to serious systemic diseases such as fluorosis.
  The World Health Organization has approved that the guaranteed amount of fluoride in drinking water should be 1.5 mg / l.
In terms of environmental pollution for humans, especially arsenic, radon-dioxins pose a carcinogenic danger, for professional groups: asbestos, benzene, mustard, hexavalent chromium, vinyl chloride, cadmium Other substances.
 The carcinogenic properties of arsenic have been established in Taiwan due to the high content of this substance in drinking water.
  Swedish researchers have identified the carcinogenic risk of radon in general populations, especially in the development of lung tumors.
The rate of urbanization and industrial development of biosphere resources is global today, which makes it imperative to ecologize human economic activity, the need to establish an optimal relationship between industrialization and the biosphere.
  The development and implementation of the scientific and practical foundations of environmental ecology will significantly mitigate the destructive impact to which the biosphere is exposed through anthropogenic and man-made influences.
LiteratureMediko Shahinyan THE EFFECT OF TECHNOGENIC POLLUTION ON THE ENVIRONMENT ON HUMAN AND ECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS Keywords: environment, man-made pollution, ecological systems, carcinogens.
