DESCRIPTION OF THE ROLLING SYSTEM AND METHODOLOGICAL QUESTIONS In order to find out the methodological issues of transmitting the grammatical system of Old Armenian, Middle Armenian and Ashkharhabar, in this work we will refer to each discipline separately, then continue the study with Armenian guidance.
  Guided by the simultaneous (panchronic) point of view, linguistic reality is examined regardless of the latter's time constraints, as a reality in general1.
  The contemporaneous point of view presupposes to make a typological examination by means of comparison, in this case with regard to the linguistic realities of Old Armenian, Middle Armenian and Ashkhar.
At the beginning of the delivery of the rolling system, the rolling-rolling key connection is clarified. It is customary to consider the conjugation as a set of regularities of the inflection of words, and to consider the separate expression of the latter as a conjugation.
Teaching the topic requires a basic knowledge of the linguistic or typological classification of languages.
In Grabar, in grammatical and conjugation systems, the grammatical expression is predominantly oblique.
  Grabarum holovum is paralleled with holovich, and holov with holovakert.
 Grabarum holovum is determined by holovichs.
 Rollers are the vowels that participate in word spelling և contain information about word spelling.
In Grabar, one or more rollers can take part in the spelling of the word, according to which we distinguish between simple-mixed splices, we separate external-internal spellings according to the placement of the splicers.
Thus, the observation of the composition of the consonants shows that the singular direct and the accusative are similar in sound composition.
  The only way to differentiate them is the decisive article.
  Among the unique ones, the sexual one is formed with the addition of corresponding rollers.
  The tragic is formed like a sexual, only by hunting. The word in the Trakan conjugation gets conjugations.
 The exceptional originates from the direct or tragic basis with the addition of a trailer.
 The basis for the pragmatics is the sexual, tragic clips with the addition of the corresponding clips.
  The plural direct is formed by the plural q, which is added to either the singular direct or the singular, depending on the inclination of the word.
  The plural claim is made up of the direct plural in the sequence q.
  Plural sexual syllables have the same composition.
  The exception of the plural 1 See Aghayan Ed., Fundamentals of Linguistics, Yerevan, 1987, p. 128.
It is composed of trakan, pre-made by means of a trailer.
  In practice, q is added to the base of the singular 1.
In the grammatical system of Middle Armenian, in contrast to Old Armenian, the adverbial structure develops.
 The composition of the tracks bears the following changes. There is a frequent decrease in the number of plaintiffs f, as a result of which there is a direct identification of the claim clauses, as well as the identification of the sexual clauses.
  In the practical (parallel to b) the ending expands its field of use.
  The exception is e.
  The Nergoyan syllable is still a newly formed grammatical reality in Middle Armenian2.
Attachment is the basic structure of a grammatical expression in the world system.
  In the system of consonants, direct's claim, sexual և tragic's are identified.
  Only in the case of pronouns do the sexual syllables differ in their vowel composition.
In the singular և the singular exception is made up of the suffix, and the practical one is made up of all the suffixes.
For Nergoyan, whose part stabilizes?
From the examination of the linguistic realities of the Old Armenian, Middle Armenian և Ashkharhabar system, we find out: 1. If in the Old Armenian syllable system the elements of inclination predominate, then in Middle Armenian և in the world language the elements of more eccentricity և comparativeness prevail.
2. In Grabar, the conjugation of the word is determined by the sexual's active verbs, as in Grabar the distinction between simple and mixed conjugations is distinguished.
 However, it should be noted that sometimes the second conjugation, which was supposed to appear in the singular case, is seen in the exclusive conjugation, as in the case of mixed conjugation words E-A, for example, yezane, bar load, lamb, etc. The castings were not clean and uncluttered.
  Later this linguistic reality disappears.
  In the world, the conjugation of a word is determined by a unique conjugation.
3. If in the Old Armenian the conception of the conjugation was connected with the conjugation, and the conjugation with the conjugation, then in Middle Armenian the role of the conjugator և conjugation is noticeably diminished, as they more often begin to appear as a single form, which forms this or that conjugation.
4. If in the Old Armenian the sexual syllable was formed like a Thracian, only with the difference that the Thracian syllable received syllables: y, n, j, nj, to whom, respectively, Arshak - Arshakay, male - village, village - village, woman - woman, - Tunjian, right - right, then in Middle Armenian և Ashkharhabar the sexual-tragic syllables are the same, because the comprehension of the syllable is no longer understood. In Middle Armenian, at the end of the words A in the external conjunction A, the conjugation y has no regular canonical use, and in the secular world we do not distinguish in such a conjunction, the masculine noun is not used, especially since its sexual word would be paired with the word widow.
 In the case of the word woman: fusion 1 See Abrahamyan A., Grabar manual, Yerevan, 1976, pp. 15-27.
2 See "Essays on the History of Middle Literary Armenian", vol. B, Yerevan, 1975, page 64.
or as a result of assimilation, the eggs have been assimilated;
 In the Tujanj word (already a word in the world language) the nj trailer that appeared before the conjugation is no longer perceptible.
And whose trailer has stabilized as a form of symmetrical nerd և.
5. If in Old Armenian the direct-accusative syllables were singularly distinguished only by the presence or absence of the definite article f, and the plural accusative was composed of the plural direct-k in the order of c, then in Middle Armenian the direct-accusative syllables are the same.
 In Middle Armenian, the means of differentiation f has no regular use.
 The only difference is the plural case, the direct part of which is formed by the plural q or the compound plural, in which q is the last component.
  In the world, the plaintiff has no right of his own, it is sometimes straightforward, sometimes straightforward.
6. If in Old Armenian we distinguish three inner consonants արտաքին into six external consonants, then in Middle Armenian the number of consonants reaches 13, of which five are inward inclination and eight in the outer inclination.
In Ashkharhabar we have six external inclination և two internal inclinations, that is, if in Old Armenian the words of internal inclination form a large group due to the fact that the grammatical expression is in the form of inclination, and in Middle Armenian, then in the world language the words of external inclination predominate.
7. If in Old Armenian և in Middle Armenian we distinguish AO external consonants, moreover, it is noticeable that if in Old Armenian the special names - Arshakay, Vardanay, Tashrats, Kushanats - are subject to the first consonant, then in Middle Armenian also the common names - sultana, fulanay, mamka, Madam և etc., then in the world we mention two words belonging to these connotations: girl, love քանի a few words, which are used in some applications in the Grabar conjugation, but in parallel are subjected to I conjugation: mourning, hope, light-light, etc.
8. If in Old Armenian հ is active in Middle Armenian, the consonant E is not active, then in the world language we do not distinguish such a consonant, only a few examples are evidenced: emperor, daughter, which are consented with another consonant և.
9. O's's's's's's's's's's's's's կան։ ով ով։։։,։,, բառերը։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
  In Middle Armenian it becomes a rule and regularity և it is passed to the world language.
10. If in Old Armenian the consonant O had not yet existed, then in Middle Armenian the consonant j, merging with the consonant, appears as a single's և appears in the new consonant.
 Individual nouns are subject to this inclination: widow, neighbor, sister-in-law, etc.
 In the cosmos, nouns denoting a person belong to this passage.
11. In Old Armenian, the pronunciation of VAN did not exist, and in Middle Armenian, the pronunciation of VAN was still a newly formed grammatical novel, with a limited use.
 In the world, this conjugation, as in Middle Armenian, is semantic, to which contemporary nouns belong.
12. In Grabar, the plural direct is mostly composed of plurals, but the idea of ​​plurality is also expressed by other plurals.
 If in Old Armenian these syllables are ambiguous due to the oblique structure of the grammatical expression, that is, one can consider "'s" as an adjective, "as a digit", then in Middle Armenian the plural direct participle does not take a syllable's, it differs from other oblique forms only in the presence of digit (s). .
  There are many digit numbers in Middle Armenian, but -q, -er, -ner, -ni stand out with their functional activity.
 In the cosmos, the plural direct does not receive consonantal states, but digital states - -er, -s.
13. If in the Old Armenian the singular was formed by the preposition և, and the plural the singular is formed by the preposition with the addition of the preposition, in Middle Armenian the singular is formed either with a suffix or without a suffix.
  The plural singular is formed either by the grammatical form or by two forms, one for the number and the other for the grammatical meaning of the syllable.
 The adverbial structure of the grammatical expression develops.
  In the world, it has an exceptional consonant from h, the endings that are added either to the direct or to the sexual.
Thus, under the influence of the plural forms of the Grabarian external conjugation, the index of the world-exclusive exception is formed and stabilized, both in singular and plural numbers.
 And the Grabarian is a unique exception. The conjugation in ArmArmenian turns into a conjugation, a unique, plural exceptional indicator.
 It is noteworthy that in this case, the plurality has affected, "suppressed" the uniqueness. From passes from the plural to the singular field, and in the case of e, the singularity prevails. E passes from a unique number to the plural field.
14. In Grabar, the verb consisted of a singular gender, receiving corresponding conjugations, and the conjugation words received a numerical zero ending.
  The plural of the plural consists of the plural of erezak with the addition of q.
  In Middle Armenian, the pragmatic is formed by who's word, which, in addition to the Grabarian words, has spread to other words belonging to other letters.
 The plural form is formed in two ways, the old type, when q is the plural, it is added to the singular form.
  The second type of plural function has a compound composition. It consists of a combination of the slopes of the Czakak function of direct plurals.
  In Ashkharhabar, the practical trailer is made up of who cares.
  The practical is mainly composed of the direct basis.
  As the singular, so the plural appears as the ending.
15. If in Old Armenian the meaning of the nergoy's expression is expressed in the singular: trakan ", and the plural - i + hog. In plain Armenian, these templates are still active in terms of expressing the meaning of the noun.
  At the same time, other stereotypes appear, as a means of expressing the orthodox consonant, the preposition և the whole's expression, which in Old Armenian արտահայտ expressed the meaning of the intransitive, but was already disappearing linguistic realities, due to the fact that the's version stabilizes for the homosexual consonant.
  The worldly syllable of Ashkharhabar originates from the Grabarian "i + um ending in trakan".
  The ending is added to the direct basis.
Hayarpi Baghdasaryan DRAWING DESCRIPTION OF THE ROLLING SYSTEM AND METHODOLOGICAL QUESTIONS Keywords: rolling system, rolling, rolling
.
