Voluntary renunciation of crime Crime prevention is one of the problems of criminal law.
 It is carried out by various criminal means and mechanisms.
 One of such mechanisms is the institute of voluntary renunciation of crime.
 It encourages the person to back off from the realization of his criminal intent, to bring the crime to an end.
  The purpose of enshrining legal norms on voluntary renunciation of crime in the Criminal Code is to prevent the commission of new crimes.
  A person who voluntarily renounces a crime is not subject to criminal liability if what he / she actually committed does not contain any other corpus delicti.
  The social mission and significance of this institute can be illustrated as follows: "Crimes are easier to prevent than to fight back."
 The institution of exemption from criminal liability in case of voluntary renunciation of a crime is aimed at encouraging the person who has started a criminal activity to stop his / her activity, to renounce the realization of a criminal purpose, thus preventing dangerous consequences for the society.
  The institution of voluntary renunciation can operate when the actions are sufficient to prosecute him.
  In his work, this situation was figuratively described by the German lawyer, criminologist F. The list. "The legislator has built a golden bridge for the retreat of the person who started the initial criminal activity" 1.
The enactment of the norms on voluntary renunciation in the criminal code pursues the goal of creating the maximum conditions for a person to personally terminate his criminal activity.
  This norm enshrined in the Criminal Code, containing a large preventive charge, is aimed at achieving this goal.
Norms on voluntary renunciation of crime are enshrined in the criminal codes of different countries: Russia, Austria, Spain, Poland, Germany.
Voluntary renunciation of a crime is also enshrined in the RA Criminal Code.
 According to Article 36 1 1 of the latter, voluntary renunciation of a crime is considered to be a person preparing to commit a crime, attempting to commit a crime or to stop acting directly (committing an act) directly if the person has realized a crime. . 321. Cite. по.
 Rule of Law Russia, under order. В. Opportunity to complete the service 1.
 Refusal to complete the crime completely excludes criminal liability.
However, certain conditions are necessary in order for a person who voluntarily renounces a crime not to be held criminally liable.
 First, there must be no other corpus delicti in his actual execution.
  This provision is enshrined in Article 36 2 2, according to which a person who voluntarily renounces a crime is not subject to criminal liability if the act actually committed by him does not contain any other corpus delicti.
 The refusal to complete the initial criminal activity must be done by Linikamov.
  The peculiarity of this feature is that the person renounces the crime of his own free will (internal motive) and not because of the impossibility of completing it.
  Ն. According to Durmanov, there can be no voluntary renunciation of a crime when there are obstacles in the commission of the crime, albeit insurmountable, but more significant than the person thought at the beginning of the crime, պատճառով because of these circumstances the person refuses to complete the crime2.
  That is, the criminal realizes that the commission of the crime has become difficult, և stops the crime by the force of that circumstance.
Գ. Krivolopov, as an independent feature of voluntary renunciation, singles out not completing the crime.
  However, it is not so correct to consider it a separate feature, because by giving up the crime, the person at the same time refuses to complete it.
The next feature of voluntary renunciation is the realization of the end of the crime.
  It is widely believed in the legal literature that this feature does not play an independent role, but acts as a component of voluntary renunciation.
 However, the desire alone is not enough to give up voluntarily, it is necessary for the person to realize the possibility of completing the crime.
  Consciousness և will is the basis of any human activity, they are closely connected, mutually conditioned by each other, but at the same time there are different aspects of personal psychological activity.
 Therefore, the realization of the completion of the crime has a significant legal significance.
A definite feature is also the final renunciation of the crime.
 The person who started the initial criminal activity should completely refuse to complete it, not temporarily postpone the commission of the crime in order to carry it out in more favorable conditions in the future.
The issue of final refusal is not regulated in the RA Criminal Code.
This gap needs to be filled so that there are no difficulties in applying this institution in practice.
Voluntary renunciation of a crime is possible during an unfinished criminal preparation for a crime, when the crime is still criminal. Unnecessary repetition was allowed in Part 1 of Article 36 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
 The crime, according to cr. According to Article 34 of the Criminal Code, it is considered an act aimed directly at committing a crime. The wording of the law - "attempted crime or action aimed directly at committing a crime" - is not so correct.
2 See Durmanov N., Stages of perfection of redistribution in Soviet rule of law, Moscow, 1999, p. 193.
He did not do everything in his power to complete the crime.
 In this case, the person can renounce the crime, exhibiting both active and passive behavior.
In the science of criminal law, there are disputes over the question of whether it is possible to voluntarily renounce a crime during an attempted crime.
R. Gabdrakhmanov claims that one should not speak about voluntary renunciation during the completed criminal attempt1.
  Such an opinion is also expressed by I. Tishkich 2, K. Panko և others 3.
  In their opinion, one should not give up what has already happened.
Ն. According to Durmanov, at the end of the attempted crime, he voluntarily renounced a possible crime on the condition that the act committed had not yet caused dangerous consequences for the society, and was exhibiting inactive behavior in order to prevent those consequences4.
 A number of other lawyers (Kuznetsova, Ivanov, Koroulov, Zdarovamislov, Naumov Zhurishner) 5 agree with the latter point of view.
In our opinion, the last version of the solution of this issue is more preferable.
That is, in exceptional cases, the crime can be waived during the completed criminal attempt.
  In this case, it is necessary to find out whether the person has maintained control over the causal connection between the development of a publicly dangerous action (inaction), criminal consequences, whether it can influence the further development of the causal connection, prevent the occurrence of criminal consequences or the development of causal links. Achieving otherwise depends on the offender.
  If the development of causation still depends on the person, then the person can renounce the crime, preventing the emergence of dangerous consequences for society, and if the development of causation is no longer dependent on the perpetrator, then it is impossible to renounce the crime.
  For example, a criminal gives poison to another person in order to kill him, but before the poison starts to act, you refuse to achieve the goal, he gives an antidote, preventing the occurrence of criminal consequences.
  In this case, his act will be qualified as a voluntary renunciation of the crime, because he had maintained control over the causal link, և the end of the crime depended on him.
  However, if the offender, not having an antidote or not knowing the composition of the poison, seeks the help of the medical service, thus, in fact, the development of a causal connection հասնել achieving criminal consequences depends on the medical service, this will not be considered a voluntary renunciation.
The RA Criminal Code also regulates the issues related to the accomplices - organizer, instigator, supporter - voluntary renunciation of the crime.
 According to Article 36 3 3, the organizer, instigator or facilitator of a crime is not subject to criminal liability in case of voluntary renunciation. Public part ”, under order. А. Ignatova, Gj. Krasikova, Moscow, 2003, page 24.
2 See Tishkevich I., Preparation and Training in Soviet Role-Law, Moscow 1958, p. 74.
3 See “Rule of Law. Public part ”, under order. Н. Kuznetsov, Moscow, 2004, p. 124.
4 See “Rule of Law of Russia. Общая часть ”, page 124.
5 Ibid., P.
liability, if he, by notifying the state bodies or by other measures taken, prevented the perpetrator from completing the crime.
  It is clear from the above that the accomplices by their active actions must prevent the perpetrator from completing the crime they have committed, և only in this case they will be released from criminal liability.
 And if they are not able to prevent the perpetrator from completing the crime, then they are subject to Emerald responsibility.
 However, in this case, their actions will be taken into account as a mitigating circumstance when personalizing the responsibility.
 This is directly enshrined in Part 4 of Article 36 of the Criminal Code. "If the actions mentioned in the third part of this article did not lead to the prevention of the perpetrator's crime, then the measures taken may be taken into account when imposing the punishment as a mitigating circumstance."
If the characteristic of the organizer or instigator to voluntarily renounce the crime is that they "withdraw their contribution" from the planned crime by preventing the perpetrator from completing the crime, the same cannot be said of the accomplice.
Voluntary renunciation of the crime by the facilitator is significantly different from the renunciation of the organizer-instigator.
 In order for the accomplice to refuse the crime, it is enough for him to do everything in his power to prevent the planned crime.
 Preventing crime ը taking action to prevent it is not the same thing.
 For an accomplice who is not at the same time the organizer of the crime, in case of voluntary renunciation of the crime, it is sufficient to withdraw his contribution from the planned crime.
  In the case of physical assistance, when the facilitator provides the means, tools or removes the obstacles, it is sufficient to withdraw the given tools and means or to restore the previously removed obstacles in order to renounce the crime.
  In the case of intellectual assistance, when it is disclosed to the offender, the means and tools of the crime, with the promise of borrowing the traces of the crime or criminally obtained items, acquiring or selling such items, to inform the executor of the crime, the promises made will not be fulfilled.
 It should be clear to the performer that the supporter is "out of the game", one should not rely on him.
 With this step, the accomplice breaks all the ties that existed between his "perpetrator" and, in fact, there is no causal link between the "criminal consequences" of the auxiliary actions, as an objective feature of the complicity.
 The actions of the supporter must be qualified as a voluntary renunciation of the crime.
However, in the case of intellectual assistance, when the assistance is provided by giving advice, instructions or information, the renunciation of the crime is carried out with certain peculiarities.
If he has not yet committed the above-mentioned actions, then simply not committing the crime is enough to renounce it, and if he has committed it, it is possible to renounce the crime only by taking active actions and preventing the crime.
 In the latter case, the facilitator, in terms of renouncing the crime, resembles the organizer-instigator.
We consider that it is expedient to envisage the voluntary renunciation of the crime by the facilitator in a separate part of Article 36, taking into account the above-mentioned peculiarities.
As mentioned, the other participants in the crime, the organizer-instigator, in case of voluntary renunciation of the crime, must inform the state bodies or take other measures to prevent the perpetrator from completing the crime.
The measures taken can be intellectual or physical.
  Intellectual resources can be exploited in a variety of ways, urging, persuading to refuse to complete a crime, breaking promises made in advance, threatening to inform government agencies of a crime being prepared, and other means.
  The organizer, the instigator, can prevent the crime through physical influence against the perpetrator, for example, by taking back the means and tools provided for the commission of the crime, by restoring the removed obstacles.
Of particular interest is the use of physical force against the perpetrator և its criminal assessment.
 The question arises here: can the use of physical force be qualified as a necessary defense?
  In order for the act to be qualified as a necessary protection, it is necessary to have all the necessary features for the application of this institution.
  Here it is necessary to analyze in detail the "adequacy of the prevented crime".
  For example, the organizer, who is also a co-perpetrator of the crime, refuses to kill two or more people during the crime attempt; physical coercion even kills the perpetrator to prevent the latter from completing the crime, while maintaining all the necessary conditions of legal protection.
  In this case, the actions of the executor should be qualified as necessary protection.
 If the perpetrator acts in the same way to prevent theft, then in this case, being released from criminal liability for theft, he will be held liable for exceeding the necessary protection.
There can be no question of necessary defense at the earliest stage of the initial criminal activity.
 At this stage, crime can be prevented in safer ways, for example, by applying to state bodies.
Denial of a crime is of an individual nature; այն Only those accomplices who have voluntarily renounced the completion of the crime will be released from criminal liability.
  If the perpetrator renounced the crime under the influence of an organizer, instigator or facilitator, they will also be released from criminal liability on the basis of voluntary renunciation of the crime.
  However, if the perpetrator renounced the crime against the will of the organizer, instigator or facilitator or against their will, they should be prosecuted for preparing the crime.
Regulating the issues of the accomplices 'renunciation of the crime, the legislator, however, did not address the issue of the accomplices' renunciation.
The question may arise as to whether it is sufficient for the accomplice to cease his activities, or whether he should take measures to stop the criminal activities of the other accomplices as well, in order to prevent the occurrence of dangerous consequences for the society.
In our opinion, just stopping one's own actions is enough for the accomplice to give up the crime.
  However, if the crime to be committed is serious or particularly serious, the person will be held liable for failing to report a well-known serious or particularly serious crime (Article 335, Part 1 of the Criminal Code).
  But if the person, by refusing to commit the crime directly, participates in the commission of the crime in any way, he / she will be held responsible as an organizer, instigator or facilitator.
  For example, a group of people agree to commit murder (a serious crime), but one of the perpetrators refuses to commit a crime and does not go to the scene.
  In this case, the person, being released from responsibility for the murder, will be held liable in accordance with Article 335, Part 1 of the Criminal Code, for not reporting a serious or particularly serious crime that is definitely being prepared.
 And if, nevertheless, he went to the crime scene, but refused to participate in the implementation of the objective side of the crime, then he can be held responsible for supporting the crime.
  In this case, the assistance will be in the form of removing the obstacles, as his presence can strengthen the perpetrator's determination, the lack of which could be an obstacle to the completion of the crime.
  We think it would be expedient to regulate the peculiarities of the accomplices to renounce the crime like other accomplices in a separate part of Article 36 of the Criminal Code.
Hovhannes HovhannisyanVOLUNTARY REFUSAL OF CRIME Keywords: institute of voluntary renunciation of crime, person voluntarily renouncing crime, crime, person who committed a crime, accomplices, perpetrator, organizer, instigator, supporter, accomplices, accomplice, premeditated
