APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES UNRELATED TO IMPRISONMENT Punishment Punishment is the second main institute of criminal law after a crime.
 The system of punishments imposed on juveniles is notable for its effectiveness and the need to define specifics.
  21st century On the eve of adolescence, the problems of minors continue to concern the whole of humanity.
 Solutions to this problem are sought in almost all countries of the world, including Armenia.
 We can not deny the fact that juvenile delinquency has its own characteristics, the study of which allows finding solutions, developing a system of punishment that will minimize juvenile delinquency, leading to the emergence of healthy young people with a legal conscience.
  The system of punishments imposed on juveniles is not very effective.
  Of the types of punishments included in the punishment system, only imprisonment is effective, which has a negative impact on the juvenile's future life, making it difficult to reintegrate into society.
  Therefore, we find it more expedient to emphasize non-custodial punishments when sentencing juveniles, creating conditions to ensure the correction of juveniles without isolating them from society.
In the system of punishments enshrined in the RA Criminal Code, the types of punishments not related to imprisonment are fines and public works.
  Let us refer to each of them separately, to find out their essence, to find the existing problems, to give appropriate solutions.
Fine.
  This type of punishment, which is the mildest in the general punishment system, is envisaged by the legislator in the system of punishments imposed on juveniles.
 According to Article 87, Part 1 of the RA Criminal Code, the fine is applied in case of any personal property of the juvenile on his / her own earnings, on which confiscation can be applied.
 It is clear from the interpretation of the above provision that the imposition of a fine on a minor is not possible in all cases, in particular, when the person has his own earnings or his own property subject to confiscation.
  In our opinion, the provision of this provision in the RA Criminal Code is correct, as it follows from the principle of personal responsibility պատասխանատվ does not allow the fine to be applied in the case when the minor has no own income or property.
 It follows that confiscation cannot be applied to the property of his parents, as applied by the Criminal Code, which violated not only the principles of individualization of punishment and personal responsibility, but also the principle of inevitability, as the perpetrator was not subject to coercion.
The RA Criminal Code stipulates that the fine imposed on juveniles is applied in case of the juvenile's own earnings or the existence of such property on which confiscation can be applied, "does not provide for an exception.
 Such a regulation is noteworthy and commendable, but the practice shows something else, in particular, the fine imposed on minors is mainly repaid by their parents1.
 As a result, the juvenile commits the crime, and the parents bear the punishment, because the juvenile has no income of his own.
  In the current conditions, the imposition of a fine is considered as a release from punishment.
  After all this, it is unclear how effective the fine can be for a minor, to what extent it will contribute to the latter's correction process.
Opinions have been expressed in the legal literature that the purpose of correcting a sentence is not achieved by imposing a fine at all.
This simply reminds the criminal of the need to be more prudent and accountable in the future.
  In this regard, it should be noted that the legislation of the Federal Republic of Germany does not apply fines to minors.
  The imposition of a fine is considered an unsuitable measure for educational work.
 Instead, the legislation of the Federal Republic of Germany provides for a criminal offense such as making monetary payments to an institution that carries out a public service, which is assigned only to minors who have committed minor offenses and have their own funds.
  In addition, these payments may be made during the confiscation of proceeds of crime.
In order for a convict, like him, to be assessed by the society as a criminal punishment, it must first of all be such that it significantly touches the property interests of the convict.
 On this occasion, M. Shagorodsky wrote: "The fine must be large enough to be significant for the person և to be able to have a terrifying effect."
In the case of minors, the problem is twofold. First of all, it must be collected from the means of a really minor, and secondly, it must be significant.
  Therefore, it is necessary to take measures to solve these problems in the law enforcement sphere, to prescribe this type of punishment in case the availability of funds is definitely known to the juvenile.
Taking into account the above, we propose to impose a fine only on those juvenile defendants who have reached the age of 16, who earn money on their own, work under an employment contract with the employer.
  In addition, a deferred payment system should be established for the payment of the fine, setting the amount of the minimum payment amount.
The fine against a minor is imposed in the amount of ten to five hundred times the minimum salary established in the Republic of Armenia at the time of sentencing.
 We think that in the current situation it is similar to the size of the fine 1 See "The fine imposed on minors in Armenia is mainly repaid by their parents" was available at http.
//shamshyan.com/old/arm/EJqQDUOa8P.html.
2 See Tsvetinovich A., Additional Penalties, Kuybyshev, 1989, p. 14.
The margins, taking into account the possible income of minors, correspond to the criteria of fairness, proportionality and common sense, if we solve the problem related to the actual payer of the fine.
The fine is widely used in England, France, Sweden, Italy, Switzerland and other countries.
  There are several types of fines in the criminal legislation of these countries.
  The most common of these is the fine, the amount of which is determined by the court within the limits specified in the Criminal Code.
  In some countries, for example, Spain, Germany, France, Austria, the fine is imposed at a daily rate, ie in accordance with the salary for certain days, months and years.
  In Germany, there is a property fine, which is imposed not as an alternative to imprisonment, but at the same time.
 Unlike a fine, it is not calculated according to the system of daily rates, but is a payment of a sum of money decided by the court.
Public works.
 It should be noted that for our reality, this new type of punishment is used quite effectively in the USA, France, England, Sweden and other countries.
 Public works, as a type of punishment, for the first time in 1971. provided for in the Swiss Criminal Code.
 At first, this type of punishment was applied only to juveniles as the main punishment.
  It was later applied to juveniles as an additional punishment.
  Thus, the Swiss Penal Code is the first in Europe to provide for public works as the main punishment1.
  In Sweden, public works are defined as 40 to 200 hours.
 This type of punishment is applied to those convicts in connection with whom a decision has been made not to apply the sentence conditionally.
  Public works are carried out under the supervision of the probation service inspector.
  The court, when appointing public works, determines its term, taking into account the gravity of the crime committed, as it indicates the term of imprisonment that can be imposed on the convict if he maliciously violates the conditions of public works.
  The nature and location of the work are determined by the probation service2.
  Latvia has achieved the most successful results in the use of public works from the post-Soviet countries, where it has increased from 1.4% to 8% in 3 years, and convictions for public works account for about 10% of the total number of court decisions.
 Public utility work in Finland began on an experimental basis in 1991, and in 1994. From April 1, that system covered the whole country.
In France it is called work for the benefit of the society, it is used with the consent of the convict.
 In France և in England it is 40 to 240 hours.
The advantage of this type of punishment is that the person convicted of public works, not avoiding punishment, at the same time is not removed from his family, micro-environment, keeps his job, avoids the phenomenon of social alienation, often destructive influence of the correctional facility.
However, unfortunately, public works in Armenia are still effective 1 See “Rule of law for slavery. Общая часть ”, Moscow, 2003, page 91.
2 See "Code of Conduct", SPb., 2001, page 6.
can not be considered.
  2003 August 1, 2006 About 30 cases of using public works were registered in the Republic of Armenia in the period of December 2012, but all of them referred to the situations when in case of impossibility to pay the fine the court replaced the unpaid part of the fine with public works.
 During that period, no case was registered where public works were used at the request of a person sentenced to imprisonment as an alternative to imprisonment1.
 Such a situation, naturally, is conditioned by a number of objective-subjective factors.
 These factors include the scarcity of employers who want to use the work of convicts, the lack of a clear mechanism in place to ensure the use of public works, the intolerance of convicts to engage in public work due to nationalism, and the fear that this new punishment may apply. open to the flourishing of corruption.
 Add to this the existence of a number of gaps at the legislative level.
 Despite all this, we believe that in case of full legislative regulation, the type of public works punishment will work effectively against minors, the nature of the planned works just needs to be changed. They should facilitate the acquisition of a profession by the juvenile, which will have an educational or educational significance.
According to Article 54, Part 1 of the RA Criminal Code. "Public works are the performance of works useful for the society by the convict, not paid by the competent body, appointed by the court at the place determined by the competent body.
  Public works may be assigned to persons sentenced to imprisonment for a maximum of two years for committing minor or medium-gravity crimes. ”
  Public works cannot be assigned to persons under 16 years of age at the time of sentencing, based on the principle of humanity.
  Indeed, in the case of persons under 16 years of age, the application of this type of punishment is not expedient in the modern sense, but in case of its new content, this minimum age can also be revised.
 It is obvious that if public works are combined with vocational training, it can also be applied to minors under 16 years of age.
  We propose to appoint public works in the case of juveniles, not only in the case of non-minor, medium-gravity, but also in the case of serious crimes not accompanied by violence or threat of its use, as this group of juveniles can be corrected using this type of punishment.
It is especially noteworthy that public works are assigned as an alternative form of imprisonment for a certain period of time, which is not provided for in the sanction of any article in the special part of the RA Criminal Code.
 In order to apply this type of punishment, it is necessary that the convict submits a written application within 20 days after receiving the order to execute the judgment that has entered into force.
  This provision is intended for both adult and juvenile offenders.
 In our opinion, the legislator has complicated this procedure a lot, 1 an 1 See http.
//iravaban.net/1766.html.
In the case of adults, the type of punishment and the grounds for its application should have been defined separately in Section 5 of the RA Criminal Code, as other types of punishment have been defined.
  We suggest envisaging public works as the main type of punishment in the sanctions for certain crimes of the special part of the RA Criminal Code, in particular, in the case of crimes against public order.
  This type of punishment can be an effective tool in the fight against this group of crimes (for example, in correcting persons who have committed hooliganism).
According to Part 2 of Article 54 of the RA Criminal Code, this type of punishment is imposed for a period of 270 to 2200 hours.
 We can state that the definition of these frameworks is not justified, especially in the case of minors.
We suggest, first of all, in the case of minors, to reduce the minimum to the maximum size.
 We consider that both the maximum and minimum limits of public works, as well as the adaptation of the substitution of imprisonment are endowed with a number of peculiarities.
  In our opinion, it is not so fair for minors. We offer 270 hours, which is equivalent to about 3 months, reduce it to 1 month, that is, 90 hours, on the basis of which it is possible to reduce the upper limit.
  In this regard, it is possible to cite the mandatory work provided for in the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, which can be assigned to a minor for 40 to 160 hours.
  We consider this approach of the Russian Federation acceptable, which proceeds from the principle of humanity, as well as from the fact that a minor should not be sentenced to the same amount as a minor.
 In addition, according to the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, compulsory labor is performed by minors within their means, after school hours, free time 1.
According to Article 51, Part 4 of the RA Criminal Code, in case of impossibility to pay the fine, the court replaces the fine or the unpaid part of the fine with public works for 5 hours of public works for the minimum wage.
  If, as a result of the calculation made to replace the fine or the unpaid part of the fine with public works, the result is less than 270 hours, then it is assigned 270 hours, and if it exceeds 2200 hours, it is assigned 2200 hours.
The application of this norm to minors has its peculiarities.
 As the amount of the fine imposed on minors varies from ten to five hundred times the minimum wage, we believe that the minimum limit should not be fixed during the replacement of the fine, otherwise an unfair situation will be created, the punishment will be replaced by unable to pay the fine.
 The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia has expressed its position on this issue.
 Prior to the Constitutional Court's decision, when calculating, for example, the replacement of a non-payment of a fine with public works, the period of public works was reduced to less than 270 hours, then 1 See “Ugolovnoe law”, 2006, p. 23.
270 hours.
 2013 of the Constitutional Court According to the decision SDO-1082 of April 23, 2012, Part 4 of Article 51 of the RA Criminal Code, insofar as the calculation of replacing the fine or the unpaid part of the fine with public works does not adequately guarantee the legal possibility of using public works for less than 270 hours. The possibility of blocking the implementation of an effective remedy for them, as it does not show a differentiated approach between the impossibility of paying the fine and the circumstances of avoiding it, was declared invalid, contradicting Article 18 of the RA Constitution.
According to Article 84, Part 5 of the RA Criminal Code, in case of malicious avoidance of public works, the court replaces the unserved part of public works with arrest or imprisonment for a certain period, calculating the latter one day for 3 hours of public works.
  In the case of juveniles, return from public work to imprisonment is inadmissible.
 Taking into account the characteristics of minors, we should avoid such situations as much as possible, so we suggest replacing them with house arrest in case of malicious avoidance of public works.
It is also worth mentioning that according to Article 17 of the RA Labor Code. "Persons from fourteen to sixteen years of age may be involved only in temporary work that does not harm their health, safety, education or morality, in accordance with Article 101, Article 140, Part 1, Clause 1, Article 155 of this Code.
 Persons between the ages of fourteen and eighteen may not be involved in work on weekends, non-working days, holidays, commemorative days, except for participation in sports and cultural events.
 A temporary employment contract is signed with people from 14 to 16 years old. ”
In fact, public works must first meet the requirements set by the Labor Code.
 It is true that the law stipulates that no public works are assigned to persons under 16 years of age at the time of sentencing, but even in the case of persons over 16 years of age (in the current context of public works) may have serious consequences for their mental, intellectual and physical development. to influence their establishment in society and the formation of self-esteem.
  The basis for the imposition of this type of punishment should be the abilities, educational level, interests of minors over 16 years of age, և they should be involved in activities that do not lead to the physical, mental or psychological development of the juvenile.
  We believe that the legislative changes we are proposing can contribute to the effectiveness of non-custodial sentences for juveniles.
Tigran Ghazaryan APPOINTMENT OF JUDGMENTS NOT RELATED TO IMPRISONMENT TO MINORS Keywords: juvenile, fine, public works, punishment, crime, punishment system, responsibility, purpose of punishment.
