ACCELERATED PROCEEDINGS ISSUES IN THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA The expedited procedure of the trial (hereinafter referred to as the Accelerated Procedure) is a novelty in the criminal proceedings of the Republic of Armenia.
  This non-traditional institute for the right to criminal proceedings of the Republic of Armenia was introduced on 21.02.2007. HO-93-N law, which supplemented the Criminal Procedure Code with section 9.1.
 The essence of this institution is that in case the defendant agrees with the accusation, the court has the right to make an accusatory verdict without a criminal case, in fact, to conduct a trial.
The purpose of the expedited procedure is, on the one hand, to facilitate the prosecution of small, medium and serious crimes, to ensure the speedy and efficient administration of justice, to relieve the burden on the courts and to save resources, and to encourage co-operation with the state.
Although this institution operates in different ways in almost all developed criminal justice systems of the world, it has not been unequivocally accepted, as the expedited trial deviates from the basic principles of justice, in particular, in this case there is no direct examination of evidence, thus losing justice to society. its "visibility" 2.
  Moreover, there are objectively possible cases when admitting guilt with a lower sentence will be beneficial for a person who has not actually committed a crime, because in that case he will insure himself against a more severe punishment.
In establishing this procedure, the interests of the parties, first of all the defendant, have been taken into account, who are interested in the court protecting their rights and legal interests without undue delays and the use of various coercive measures (especially detention as a measure of restraint).
 In addition, this institution can serve as a basis for protecting the interests of other participants in criminal proceedings, particularly victims, if they are not involved in the expedited decision-making process.
1 See "Problems of simplification of criminal proceedings", scientific-practical manual, edited by A. Ghambaryan, Yerevan, 2011, p. 106.
2 See "Scientific-practical interpretations of the decisions of the RA Court of Cassation", edited by A. Mkrtumyan, D. Avetisyan, V. Yengibaryan, R. Melikyan, Yerevan, 2011, p. 395.
It should be noted that the expedited procedure in the RA criminal proceedings is the result of a more consistent realization of the principle of competition, because if there is no dispute, there is no competition.
 It also provides an opportunity to expand the elements of disposition during the resolution of the criminal case, so that the parties to the proceedings can freely exercise their substantive procedural rights1.
The foundations of this criminal procedure institute were laid by the RA Judicial Code, Article 16 of which, as a principle of effective administration of justice, states: "As a rule, the examination in the court of first instance of general jurisdiction is carried out by a simplified procedure defined by the procedural law.
 Simplified trial procedures are defined by both criminal and civil procedure codes. ”
The analysis of international domestic documents shows that the provision of procedures in the field of criminal justice to speed up or expedite the investigation of the case has a general tendency, the content of which is to simplify criminal justice, make it more economical, introduce more effective structures in the field of crime 2.
 For example, the RA Government Decision 1207-N of 30.10.2008 approved the Sustainable Development Program, which envisages the improvement of the institute of accelerated trial in criminal proceedings3, so the definition of a fast or simplified examination of certain categories of cases is imperative.
However, the question of how to determine the limit at which the reasonable simplification of the procedure ends and the arbitrariness begins remains debatable.
Litigation is one of the basic concepts of criminal proceedings, which is the principle of "procedure and conditions for their implementation in the whole of" separate procedural actions, the protection of their course and results in accordance with the law "4, which is conditioned by the essence of criminal proceedings.
  The most controversial issue with the trial horse is the issue of misrepresentation.
  Many theorists and practical lawyers have addressed the issue of differentiation of the judicial horse.
  However, to date, no common approach has been developed on the need for differentiation, as well as its criteria and the procedure for the investigation of individual crimes.
There is no common approach in the legal literature on the understanding of the concept of differentiation in criminal proceedings.
 In theory, the differentiation of the inter-procedural horse is considered in one case as a principle, in another case as a criminal organization.
1 See "Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Armenia, Special Part", 3rd edition, edited by G. Ghazinyan, Yerevan, 2010, p. 375.
2 See “Problems of Simplifying Criminal Proceedings,” on page 5.
3 See Government of the Republic of Armenia 30.10.2008 Point 499 of the decision No. 1207-N.
4 See Dilbandyan S., Understanding the concept of "litigation" in criminal proceedings, "BEH", 2009, № 3 (129), page 3.
Differentiation of the trial horse as a principle և method.
  A. He considers the differentiation and unification of criminal proceedings as methodological principles of criminal proceedings.
  According to the author, unification is a procedural principle, which is aimed at creating a perfect structure of criminal proceedings, general universal rules.
 The principle of differentiation, according to A. Sich, is based on empirical reasoning most relevant to the modern historical period.
 Through differentiation, an attempt is made to leave the principle of unity for the sake of current vital circumstances.
  Thus, differentiation is a principle that is initially intended to provide for exceptions to general rules1.
Thus, A. In the context of the Sich approach, the differentiation and criminalization of the criminal procedure are considered as methodological principles of criminal proceedings, the relationship between which is interpreted with the help of dialectical law.
The differentiation of the judicial horse is also considered as a principle by D. To Velik.
 Saying in the version of the trial horse, D. Veliki understands the possibility of solving common problems in different ways within the framework of a common judicial system, common criminal procedure legislation2.
Distinguishing the trial horse as a criminal organization.
  A. Smirnov և K. According to Kalinowski, the differentiation of the criminal procedural horse is an organization of criminal proceedings in which, in addition to the general procedure, there are litigation forms, which provide both simplification of the procedure for less complex cases of low-risk public crimes and complication of cases or cases of more dangerous crimes. which requires more legal protection for the legitimate interests of the accused or other participants in the trial3.
Ն. According to Nikita, the differentiation of criminal cases is the formation of procedures that differ in degree of complexity and at the same time have a simplified form4.
As we can see, the scientific approaches to the litigation category under discussion are diverse.
  It must be said that one of the mentioned approaches cannot be considered completely acceptable.
  In them, we encounter the problems of the concept of criminal proceedings, which are related to the identification of criminal proceedings in criminal proceedings.
  Their delimitation, the true definition of the concept of a criminal horse in general, is obviously of great importance for the differentiation of the criminal horse and its result, the clarification of the differentiation.
The significance of differentiating the judicial horse.
  V. Arsen, N. Metlin, A. Smirnov is of the opinion that the differentiation of the judicial horse 1 See "Problems of simplification of criminal proceedings", page 8.
2 See Veliki D., Unity and Differentiation of the Process-Formal Form.
 history, contemporaneity and perspectives, Dis. канд. .р. наук, Москва, 2001, page 201, available at www.law.edu.ru/book/book.asp?bo3 See "Problems of simplifying criminal proceedings", page 12.
4 See ibid.
criminal prosecution will become a flexible weapon in the fight against crime.
  The authors add that the differentiation of the judicial horse is not arbitrary1.
A. Smirnov և K. Kalinowski notes that the speed of the trial is achieved not to the detriment of the suspect և the rights and legitimate interests of the accused, as they have the opportunity to enjoy the full range of rights established for them by the criminal procedure law in competition2.
H. Ghukasyan rightly states that the differentiation of the judicial horse is not only the simplification, acceleration, rationalization or thrift of court proceedings.
  These procedures should be so clear that they do not become a burden on trial participants in the investigation of obvious, insignificant crimes.
  At the same time, the author points out that in the case of particularly serious crimes, the criminal proceedings should include formal elements that maximally contribute to the protection of the rights and interests of natural and legal persons who have suffered from the crime3.
It must be said that the differentiation of criminal horses is not only permissible but necessary at present.
 First of all, it allows optimizing the criminal proceedings, that is, the differentiation of the judicial horse makes it possible to simplify, speed up, and save the proceedings in cases for which there is no need for a large-scale investigation.
 At the same time, one should not overlook the fact that the differentiation of litigation implies the fixing of additional guarantees in complex cases, by which their necessity is objective4.
The importance of simplifying the judicial process is also emphasized by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe in 1987. Recommendation N6R (87) 18 on the simplification of criminal justice, adopted on September 17, 2006, which states that delays in the detection of crime lead to the discrediting of criminal law, which has an impact on the proper administration of justice.
Simplification as a variant of the litigation horse5.
  Simplified litigation is defined as a simplified procedure that speeds up the judicial process in order to make the criminal justice system more efficient արդար to minimize costs.
 You. Yakimovich, A. Lenskin և T. By means of simplified proceedings, Trubnikova means proceedings in cases for which a criminal case is objectively required. 1 A reasonable, scientifically substantiated simplification of criminal proceedings enables the investigative apparatus to focus its efforts on more complex cases, subject to a preliminary examination.
2 According to the authors, the celerantes (Latin: celerantes - fast, accelerated, simplified) nature of the proceedings ensures the speed of the trial, ie its resolution without unjustified delays.
3 See "Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Armenia, Special Part", p. 377.
4 Differentiation of the trial horse means that it allows, on the basis of a differentiated approach, to provide, as necessary, guarantees for the protection of human rights in criminal proceedings, while at the same time making criminal proceedings faster, simpler and more cost-effective.
5 A study of the legal literature shows that the issue of the admissibility of the differentiation of the judicial horse is mainly related to the simplification of the judicial horse.
Speed ​​of criminal activity պարզ simplicity of criminal proceedings, which are carried out faster, at less cost than proceedings, which are carried out in a general manner1.
I. Morozova, A. Annenkov և S. Dadonov notes that simplified criminal proceedings are a procedure prescribed by law, characterized not only by short deadlines, the absence of separate stages, but also by the reduction of certain procedural norms and institutions to ensure optimal ways of achieving the goals of criminal proceedings2.
At the same time, it should be borne in mind that the speed of the investigation of the case cannot be achieved at the expense of the subjects of the trial, in particular, the rights and interests of the victim-defendant.
  That is why the legislation should establish effective structures, which will be called to prevent possible abuses in time, to expedite the consequences of the detected violations.
As it was mentioned, the accelerated procedure of the court examination, as a simplified form of court proceedings, is a novelty in the RA criminal proceedings.
  The purpose of the expedited procedure is to simplify the proceedings in cases of minor, medium gravity and serious crimes in order to ensure the swift and effective administration of justice as soon as possible.
Thus, cr. trial According to the first part of Article 375.1 of the Criminal Code, “If the accuser has not objected to the application of expedited procedure in the indictment, then the accused or the accused has the right to mediate on the application of expedited procedure for crimes for which the punishment provided by the RA Criminal Code does not exceed 10. imprisonment for a year… ".
  As follows: trial From the provisions of Article 375.1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the expedited procedure can be applied only on the initiative of the accused, who mediated the application of the expedited trial procedure և the consent of the accuser.
 Moreover, it should be noted that both the motion of the accused (defendant) and the opinion of the accuser are not binding on the court, if he finds out that the accusation is groundless, or the conditions for submitting the said motion, established by law, have not been observed.
 Thus, cr. trial According to Article 375.1, Part 2 of the Criminal Code, “in the case provided for in part 1 of this Article, the court shall apply an expedited procedure if 1. the defendant realizes the nature of the motion submitted by him և the circumstances, 2. the motion is submitted voluntarily 3,3 . consulted with a lawyer if the defendant has one. ”
 Part 3 of the same article stipulates that the court, finding that the conditions provided for in parts 1 or 2 of this article have not been observed when submitting a motion by the defendant, decides to conduct a general hearing.
  The court shall reject the motion to apply expedited procedure if it finds that the defendant's action has no legal qualification.
1 See “Problems of Simplifying Criminal Proceedings,” on page 23.
2 See ibid.
3 As a general rule, the presumption is that the voluntary nature of the motion for an expedited trial presupposes that there are no reasonable grounds to question the defendant's will as to his or her will.
The nature of the presented motion գիտ the realization of the consequences by the accused means a complete understanding of the essence of the procedure accelerated by the latter, as well as the realization of the material-legal-judicial consequences of its application1.
 In other words, the application of the expedited procedure is permissible when the defendant realizes the nature of the motion to apply the expedited procedure, the nature of the trial based on it, the consequences, the procedure for passing the verdict, and the limitations for appealing the verdict.
In addition to the fact that the accused must realize the nature and consequences of his motion, he must also submit the motion voluntarily.
 It means that it should be the expression of the will of the accused, and not with coercion or threats.
 If the court finds that the accused has filed the motion under threat, for example, the defendant's accomplices have threatened not to be identified, the court must reject the motion and order a general hearing2.
The provision of the condition "the motion was submitted after consultation with the Defender" is intended to exclude the adoption of an unwise decision by the accused to apply for an expedited procedure.
 That is why in case of such a motion, the court must find out whether the accused has consulted with his defense counsel about the intention to apply for an expedited procedure.
  If such a consultation has not been held, the court should give such an opportunity to the accused և defense counsel.
The main feature of the application of the accelerated procedure is that the primary importance is not given to the comprehensive and thorough examination of the circumstances of the case in court, but to the agreement of the accused with the accusation against him3.
  Such a system of resolving a case in court is based on the provision that when a party admits a disputable fact in a competitive trial, it does not require examination.
 It is appropriate to mention the well-known Russian lawyer I. Foinitsky's idea that the subject of trial in court is always some kind of dispute.
 If the given circumstance is indisputable, its proof is meaningless.
 Competitive resolution of this issue is entirely up to the parties, the adoption of which completely eliminates the need for proof 4.
  The connection of the accelerated trial is also connected with the competition, well-known forensic expert I. Petrukhin, considering that the voluntary confession of guilt eliminates the "defense" dispute of the legal accusation and the need for further trial.
On the issue of whether the accused agrees with the accusation, whether the categories of admission of guilt are identical or different A. Alexandrov - N. Dubovik believes that admitting guilt is a prerequisite for applying an expedited procedure.
  They show a similar approach to the issue. Kondratov և I. Petrukhin.
  This group of authors makes a distinction between admitting guilt and "agreeing with the accusation".
1 See RA Court of Cassation 2008 The 14th point of the decision No. TD / 0145/11 / of June 8.
2 See “Collection of decisions on criminal cases of the RA Court of Cassation. 2010 2nd half of 2011 ", vol. 3, Yerevan, 2012, page 504.
3 See "Problems of Simplification of RA Criminal Procedure", page 116.
4 See ibid.
The other group of authors considers it possible to agree with the accusation without a mandatory admission of guilt, finding that the accused declares only that he does not dispute the accusation, but nothing more.
 D. is in favor of distinguishing between pleading guilty and pleading guilty. Velikin. "The admission of guilt contains elements of remorse, of society reconciling with the victim, characterizes the person of the accused, և can serve as a mitigating measure of responsibility.
 Besides, there is also its legal aspect.
 The admission of guilt can be contained only in the testimony of the accused, especially as evidence, that kind of substantive part can be used as a basis for the accusation.
 Therefore, the admission of guilt, which was made at the stage of the preliminary investigation, recorded in the prescribed manner, confirmed by other evidence, has a purely probative, informative significance ”1.
  Ultimately, he concludes that the admission of guilt is the act of the accused, which is aimed at establishing the fact that he has committed the crime, and the agreement with the accusation is the act of the accused, which expresses his consent to apply an expedited trial.
  In other words, the admission of guilt has a material and legal significance, and the agreement with the accusation has a judicial significance.
  But here ևThe question arises: is it appropriate to attach material and legal significance to the admission of sin?
  It should be said that it is not the admission of guilt by a person, but the guilty plea of ​​a crime committed by a court that has a criminal significance, that is, such a perception of guilt as suggested by D. Velik is attacked by the presumption of innocence.
Some jurists generally reject the use of expedited trials, citing the following arguments: (a) there is a risk of voluntarily convicting another person of their guilt; (b) the confession may be enforced but the accused is afraid to report it to the court; (c) the reduced procedure or its complete non-fulfillment of the defendant 's inquisition. in which confession is viewed as the "queen of evidence."
 Regarding them, Professor Petrukhin rightly states: "All these arguments are serious if they were considered in the inquisitorial or ancient paradigm of the trial.
  But another opinion is possible on the issue under discussion.
 The principle of competition երը the interests of justice do not suffer if the parties և first of all do not consider it necessary for the defendant to examine all the evidence in court.
  Any of their objections to a reduced trial, even an unreasonable one, are subject to satisfaction.
  Then the court must find out whether the confession was received compulsorily.
 The slightest doubts about the voluntary nature of the confession should lead to the application of a full procedure for examining all the evidence in court. ”2
The following conditions are also required for the application of the expedited procedure: a) the court has clarified the link for the application of the expedited procedure 1 See "Problems of simplification of the RA criminal proceedings", page 120.
2 See ibid.
The position of the victim 1, b) the accused or the accused is a minor, c) there are no grounds for termination of the criminal case.
In the absence of any of the listed conditions, the application of the expedited procedure is inadmissible, ie only the combination of the mentioned conditions gives the court the right to make a verdict without conducting a general trial2.
In case of applying an expedited procedure of judicial examination, all the possibilities of exercising the right of defense of the defendant enshrined in the RA Constitution are fully guaranteed.
  In case of application of the legislative procedure, it defines a rather wide range of the right of the defendant to a fair trial, as well as envisages favorable legal consequences for the defendant.
  At the same time, it should be noted that the legislature does not establish any rules or procedures that would establish the involvement of the aggrieved party in the application of the expedited procedure.
 In other words, the requirement to take into account the position of the aggrieved party is not enshrined in resolving the issue of whether or not to object to an expedited trial for the accuser, nor in deciding whether to pass an expedited trial for the court.
  The constitutional wording "to restore his violated rights" 3 is also somewhat related to the victim in the criminal case, as the victim is the person whose rights have been violated by a crime.
  Moreover, within the framework of the legal interests of the victim, the restoration of the damage caused to him, the full disclosure of the circumstances of the act that caused him harm and its correct criminalization, the conviction of the person who committed a crime against him, the imposition of a just punishment.
 One of the guarantees of securing those interests is the right of the victim to have his / her case tried "in compliance with all the requirements of justice" 4.
  Thus, the allegedly violated rights of the victim are included in the protection of Article 19 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia; և the victim has the right to be provided with certain guarantees of a fair trial, including through real involvement and participation in the expedited trial.
 Moreover, the right of the victim to a fair trial should be relatively equivalent to the right to a fair trial of the accused.
  Therefore, the examination of the victim's case number 5 "observing all the requirements of justice" presupposes that a) the prosecutor must take into account the position of the victim as a subject of the prosecution when objecting to the application of expedited procedure. To find out the position of the victim in connection with the issue, c) court 1 See RA Court of Cassation 2010 The 19th point of the decision No. ESHD / 0097/01/09 / of March 26.
2 See RA Court of Cassation 2012 The 15th point of the decision No. TD / 0145/01/11 / of June 8.
3 Article 19 of the RA Constitution. "Everyone has the right to a public hearing on a case-by-case basis, in accordance with all the requirements of justice, in order to restore the violated rights."
4 See "Scientific-practical interpretations of the decisions of the RA Court of Cassation", page 397.
5 From the point of view of the right to a fair trial, the subjects of the aggrieved party are the aggrieved party, the legal representative of the aggrieved party, the legal successor of the aggrieved party, which should in principle be considered on the same level.
6 See RA Criminal Court. Clause 21 of Article 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
may reject the defendant's motion to apply expedited procedure if the victim objects 1.
Accelerated trial, being in principle inevitable, is at the same time a very problematic institution.
 In carrying out its function, the RA Court of Cassation tried to solve some of the problems in the legislation regulating the expedited trial, in particular, the question of whether the use of the expedited trial in juvenile cases is permissible or not needs to be clarified.
RA criminal trial According to Article 440 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, except for the circumstances subject to approval in all cases, in the case of minors it is necessary to find out: a) age, b) living conditions, upbringing, c) general state of health development.
  It follows from the analysis of the mentioned norm that the peculiarities of the proceedings on juvenile cases are defined by the RA Criminal Procedure Legislation.
 At the same time, it should be noted that the legal basis for the application of the accelerated procedure in juvenile cases is RA. trial are not provided by e.g.
 The Court of Cassation recorded the mentioned issue. "Although the current criminal procedure law does not impose a direct ban on the application of an expedited procedure in juvenile cases, it does not provide for special rules for the application of an expedited procedure in juvenile cases, which is different from the general procedure.
 The special rules of juvenile proceedings provide an additional guarantee of a comprehensive, full եկ objective examination of the circumstances of the case, the discovery of the reasons ների for the juvenile delinquency, the juvenile delinquency of juvenile delinquency. , an expanded scope of the subject of proof is envisaged ”2.
Based on the above, the Court of Cassation finds that the application of expedited procedure in juvenile cases is not allowed.
  This position of the Court of Cassation derives from a number of international legal instruments governing the protection of the interests of minors, in particular, in accordance with Section 5.1 of the UN Standard Minimum Rules on the Administration of Juvenile Justice: Any measure affecting the offense should be commensurate with both the specific features of the offense and the circumstances of the offense. ”
  According to part 14.1 of the same rules, "The trial must be in the interests of the juvenile, it must be carried out in an atmosphere of understanding, it will enable the juvenile to participate in the trial, to express his / her views freely there."
Cr. trial Pursuant to Article 375.2, Part 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the defendant (accused) may file a motion for expedited trial from the moment the criminal case is sent to court until the court 1 See "Scientific-practical interpretations of the decisions of the RA Court of Cassation", p. 402.
2 See RA Court of Cassation 2012 The 16th point of the decision No. TD / 0145/01/11 / of June 8.
starting the exam.
  It follows from such a legislative regulation that the accused can submit a motion to apply an expedited procedure only to a court.
  Moreover, the accused can use that right during the preparation of the trial, and the defendant can use that right from the moment the case is appointed to the trial until the beginning of the trial, that is, during the preparation of the trial.
 And in what way should the problem be solved when the defendant applies after the start of the trial?
 It must be unequivocally asserted that the court must satisfy it, on condition that it turns out that the accused has not been clarified in time the right to apply to the court with such a motion1.
Cr. trial Pursuant to Part 1 of Article 375.3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the expedited trial shall be conducted in accordance with the procedure established by Chapters 41, 42, 44 and 45 of this Code, taking into account the requirements of this Article 2.
  In fact, the peculiarities of the speedy trial lead to the non-conduct of the trial (direct examination of the evidence with the participation of the parties in court), and secondly, the criminal case. trial the application of the features defined in Article 375.3 of the Code 3.
Whether the legislator considers it possible to apply an accelerated procedure to the criminal court. However, it should be noted that the implementation of expedited proceedings becomes an end in itself when applying expedited procedure, as in case of application of expedited procedure, the legal dispute between the parties, as such, is absent4.
 Moreover, cr. trial According to Article 345 5 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the parties in their speeches have no right to rely on evidence that was not examined during the trial.
 Iskr. trial There is no provision in Section 9.1 of the Code that would allow the parties to make a speech based on the evidence gathered during the preliminary investigation when applying expedited procedure.
It is also possible to find out whether the accuser can use the powers to supplement or change the charge, as well as to drop the charge, in an expedited procedure.
 Based on the fact that cr. trial Article 309.1 of the Criminal Code connects the amendment or supplementation of the accusation with the appearance in the court during the trial of circumstances that were not known, could not be known in the pre-trial proceedings, it can be deduced that the accuser cannot use these powers in case of expedited procedure: due to the lack of opportunity to find out the grounds for it.
  It should be noted that the legislator did not impose an obligation on the investigator to clarify the defendant's right at the end of the investigation, ie to acquaint the defendant with the materials of the criminal case before drawing up an indictment.
 The lack of a special obligation to clarify this right means that it, as the right of the accused, must be clarified by the investigator when bringing charges. trial in accordance with the provisions of Article 203 of the Criminal Code.
2 Cr. trial Chapters 41, 42, 44 and 45 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, respectively, provide for "general conditions of the trial", "part of the preparation for the court session", "judicial disputes - the last word of the defendant", "judgment" .
3 See "Problems of Simplification of RA Criminal Procedure", page 111.
4 It is a question of the substantiation of the accusation, and in case of a civil lawsuit, the justification of the claim as well.
refers to the authority to drop the accusation, then the criminal trial By virtue of Article 306 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, such a case may take place in case it has not been confirmed during the court examination by the conviction of the prosecutor.
 It can be deduced from this that in the case of an expedited procedure, the exercise of the prosecutor's authority is not possible, as the prosecuting prosecutor can come to court to give his assessment of the evidence, which is absent in an expedited trial1.
Cr. trial Following the analysis of Article 375.4 of the Criminal Code, it follows that the verdict made as a result of the expedited trial cannot be appealed in a general manner, except for criminal trial cases envisaged by e.g.
 The Criminal Procedure Code sets out the grounds for overturning or amending an appealed judicial act, according to which the appealed judicial act is overturned or amended if a judicial error has been committed2.
 The legislature also provided that a judicial act be overturned or amended if a new or new circumstance was established that affected the legality or substantiation of the judicial act (Article 395 2 2).
In fact, a judicial act rendered as a result of an expedited trial, as a judicial act rendered by a court of first instance of general jurisdiction, can be appealed in a general manner in the Court of Appeal, either to make a judicial error or to new arbitrary circumstances.
 As an exception, the law mentions a case of judicial error, which makes it impossible to appeal the judicial act in an expedited manner, that is, the court's findings on the factual circumstances of the case do not correspond to the evidence examined by the court of appeal.
RA criminal trial In the Concept of the Code (hereinafter referred to as the Concept), as conceptual issues of the new Code, the elaboration of simplified procedures for the examination առանձին resolution of a separate category of cases was separated, ensuring justified saving of human resources, means։ time3.
The RA criminal case is conditioned by the mentioned problem. trial Improving one of the main conceptual directions of the development of the RA criminal procedure legislation, which is the basis of elaboration of the draft law, expanding the scope of differentiated proceedings, developing a balanced approach to them, saving resources and time on the one hand, and ensuring the interests of justice on the other.
  Consistent with that, the Concept, as a differentiated litigation form, provides for a simplified type of proceedings, such as conciliation proceedings.
According to Clause 5.9 of the Concept, “The purpose of conciliation proceedings is to conduct an expedited investigation in the absence of a dispute over the guilt of the accused.
  Conciliation proceedings may be conducted during a single trial.
 In this case, it is not the fact of the crime that is used, but the issue of the person's guilt.
  The verdict does not reflect the factual circumstances of the case, but the position of the parties to the case.
 In the case of conciliation proceedings, the examination of evidence is not carried out either 1 See "Problems of Simplification of RA Criminal Procedure", p. 113.
2 See Part 1 of Article 395 of the RA Criminal Procedure Code.
3 See RA Criminal Code. trial Sub-item "e" of item 1.16 of the Concept of the new law.
4 See RA Criminal Code. trial Sub-item "e" of item 1.17 of the Concept of the new law.
The court examines certain factual circumstances; it can demand an explanation from the accused and the victim. ”
  In fact, the conciliation procedure is considered in the Concept as a type of expedited trial, therefore the conciliation proceedings should be characterized by the features of the expedited trial.
RA criminal trial On the basis of the comparative analysis of the expedited procedure րագր the conciliation procedure envisaged in the Code, one can distinguish the following commonalities դրանց.
Commons: Both are simplified litigation tools.
։ In both cases, the basis for the application of the simplified procedure is to agree with the accusation made against him by the accused.
Երկու In both cases, the initiative must come from the accused, who submits a motion to the court for the application of the type of proceedings.
▪ In both cases, the simplification of the proceedings is at the expense of not conducting an examination of the evidence through a general procedure.
▪ In both cases, the court has discretion in the application of simplified court proceedings. The court rejects the defendant's motion if certain legal requirements of the law are not observed.
Differences. trial The application of the accelerated procedure in accordance with Article 375.1 of the Criminal Code is possible for those crimes for which the punishment provided by the RA Criminal Code does not exceed 10 years of imprisonment.
  Meanwhile, according to Clause 5.11 of the Concept, conciliation proceedings can be applied to cases of minor to medium-gravity crimes.
▪ Cr. trial According to Article 375.2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the defendant (accused) may submit a motion for an expedited trial to the criminal case from the moment the criminal case is sent to court.
  However, according to the Concept, the accused has the right to apply at the stage of preliminary court hearings through the mediation of conciliation proceedings.
▪ If the prosecutor և the other defendants have the right to object to the application of the expedited procedure, then, according to the Concept, the consent of the victim is required (paragraph 5.12 of the Concept).
 Moreover, according to the Concept, the court may reject the motion of conciliation on the initiative of the victim, if: a) it is substantially substantiated that the damage caused by the crime is not compensated, b) The crime was committed not by the accused, but by another person.
 The conciliation proceedings do not differ from the expedited procedure in their legal nature, but simply narrow the scope of the conciliation proceedings, specify the moment of the accused to apply to the court, as well as take into account the position of the victim, which may be the starting point for the court.
 From what has been said, it can be deduced that the expedited procedure envisaged by the current criminal procedure legislation is being replaced by a new institution, that is, in practice, an expedited procedure is being renamed.
GHORG VIRABYAN PROBLEMS OF ACCELERATED PROCEEDINGS IN RA CRIMINAL TRIAL Keywords: accelerated proceedings, expedited procedure of court examination.
