ETHICS IN CIVIL SERVICE BODIES Today in many countries one of the main directions of civil service is the development of an ethical management system.
Breaking the rules of ethics in the performance of official duties means a special procedure of control, which is defined by the code of ethics.
  Unlike an administrative-normative act, the code of ethics has no coercive force, the degree of its implementation depends on the cultural-value system of the given structure.
 The role of the value system of the individuals operating in that structure is great, because sometimes the contradictions arise from the difference between the individual-structure value norms.
  Working in the "shadow of the organization," as Robert Denhard (1991) put it, can ultimately challenge the moral autonomy of individuals by separating them from humanity.
 Such possible problems, which can lead to psychological internal and external conflicts, lack of motivation among employees, significantly affect the work behavior.
Today, any governing body in the course of its activities faces the problem of providing the desired behavior of the staff, providing motivation, serving the interests of the organization as much as possible.
  Motivation is a type of human influence that aims to motivate certain actions through certain stimuli.
 And what are the right stimuli?
In public service bodies, holding managers accountable for the success or failure of the body's rewards և respectively և rewards in the area of ​​ethical discussions is greatly reduced.
 This negative orientation, it can be said, is a big gap in the field of ethics research.
  However, in order to accept incentives and sanctions as applicable, effective tools, an in-depth study is needed to determine how their presence as ethical behavioral stimuli affects people's moral motivations.
  Ethical governance traditionally focuses on the rule of obedience և sanctions2.
 However, the application of sanctions in the field of ethics, as evidenced by the existence of legal norms, is growing, 1 See Demmke Ch., Moilanen T., Effectiveness of Public-Service Ethics and Good Governance in the Central Admi p. 183.
2 See Klebe / Trevino / Weaver, Advances in research on punishment in organizations.
  Descriptive and normativeperspectives, in.
 Marshal Schimanke (ed.), Managerial ethics, p. 198.
Discussions of rewards and incentives that support ethical behavior are still lacking.
 No one gets paid extra for ethical guidance or exemplary behavior.
It is not yet clear which reward methods work best to support responsible reporting behavior.
  Many public services use a variety of sanctions for abuse of office, misconduct, or unethical conduct.
  The most classic example of a disciplinary sanction for dismissal of a public official is used only in case of serious violations.
 However, it is questionable whether this tool is effective in the field of ethics.
The social-organizational justice literature suggests that managers' response to sanctions is based on the following types of justice development.1. Distributive justice, which means equal distribution of resources among employees 2 2. Procedural justice, which ensures the process of decisions on results, 3. Interactive justice - ensuring the normalization of interpersonal relations.
These types of justice development are extremely important for employee response.
The main task of effective behavior management is to identify the factors that affect staff motivation and performance, both inside and outside the workplace.
  The reasons for unethical behavior can be lack of encouragement, unclear definition of goals խնդիրների goals, poor management, unethical behavior of colleagues, mismatch between work expectations և work tasks և etc.
 Then a good leader should be able to identify the causes, discuss them with the person in question to understand how he or she can improve the situation.
 Often communication and training can be helpful in correcting the situation.
  Managers need to be very sensitive to other factors, such as depression, relationship problems, and financial difficulties.
  Although managers can not solve all problems, they can still bring the level of problem solving to the maximum acceptable level.
It is also important to realize that the reasons for unethical behavior can often be incomprehensible.
  The literature on the causes of inefficient work, motivation and methods is developing at the same time1.
 Psychological հաճախ Very often invisible problems from the outside have a great impact on work behavior.
The inability to adequately address the root causes of inefficient work behavior and unethical behavior is a major obstacle for the heads of many governmental and non-governmental bodies.
 Evidence of this fact is that managers are often unable to choose an adequate sanction for behavior or evaluation ha 1 See Menzel D., Ethics Moments in Government, Cases and Controversies; American Society for PublicAdministration, 2010, p. 69.
Due to the structural deficiencies of the system, employees receive inaccurate information about what is permissible or unacceptable behavior.
Unfortunately, little is known about the structure, functions and powers of ethics committees.
 For example, EU member states provide advisory functions to ethics bodies, but many may impose sanctions.
 There is little evidence of their internal affairs, budget or regulations, work style.
In the United States, the legislature and the judiciary have different ethical committees.
 In addition, the executive bodies of 36 states have ethics committees that vary widely in size and specificity of operation.
 Budgets range from $ 5,000 in Michigan to $ 7 million in California.
One of the most well-known ethics committees in Europe is the Public Criteria Privileges Committee in the UK.
  Research by St. Martin shows that ethics committees are more powerful in the United States than in Canada or the United Kingdom.
However, due to superficial information about these bodies, there is a lack of more frequent representation of their functions.
Many countries are satisfied with the institutionalization of anti-corruption policy for the coordination of ethical policy management.
 For example, Portugal has established the Anti-Corruption Council (CPC).
  EU member states do not provide the key to solving ethical issues in public administration in the field of ethics - the establishment of institutionalized bodies for ethical issues թ centralized coordination.
  Mainly in terms of institutionalization, member states are divided into 2 groups.
 The first group represents the countries where ministers, state bodies or institutions have established responsibility in the field of ethics.
 These are the Netherlands (Ministry of the Interior և BIOS - Basic Input / output System), the European Commission, Latvia (KNAB, which is the state body under the responsibility of the Latvian ministers; the main function is the fight against corruption) 2 և Belgium.
The second group includes countries (Denmark, Czech Republic, Italy, Finland) that do not yet have ethical bodies3.
In conclusion, we can say that the main way to ensure the effectiveness of ethical policies is their institutionalization, the creation of bodies with special functions, responsibilities and powers, regardless of the socio-political and administrative culture of individual countries.
1 See Menzel D., Ethics management for public administrators, p. 135.
2 See www.knab.gov. Knab status.
3 See Menzel D., Ethics Moments in Government, p. 84.
Lilit Shambaryan ETHICS IN CIVIL SERVICE BODIES Keywords: Ethics, civil service, ethics policy, institutionalization of ethics, staff motivation, ethics committees, effective management.
