PLACES MADE WITH "SOURCE" COMPONENT IN ARMENIAN A number of toponymic components and bases stand out among the thousands of toponyms in Armenian due to their prevalence and semantic diversity.
  Among them, the ones with "source" component are the most beautiful.
  The purpose of the present examination is to study և to present the Armenian toponyms with the "source" component, classifying them according to their composition, nature ված the preserved tradition about them.
 We have taken the material of the examination mainly from the "Dictionary of Toponyms of Adjacent Regions of Armenia" 1.
According to the composition, the toponyms we have written out are divided into five main groups: simple, derivative, complex, complex derivative-adjacent composition.
Toponyms that consist of only one root are clear and are frequented by the same word.
 In the words we examined, only one such case was encountered, which is the settlement called Aghbyur.
Derivatives are toponyms that consist of one base or root, more than one suffix, of which: Aghbyurak, Aghbyurik.
Toponyms are complex, which consist of arches with two or more bases.
  In this case, we ignore the components of word-formation bases, taking into account that they form a place-name as primary bases.
In their turn, they are articulated և articulated.
  Since the source component forms the second basis, that is, it is postpositional, that is why the complex words are formed without an articulation, for example, Lusaghbyur, Sarnaghbyur, Vardaghbyur, Shoraghbyur, etc.
We have tried to classify complex words according to the composition template, that is, according to the partial affiliation of the word of the first component.
The "noun + noun" composition is the majority, in which there are: • The first component is a toponymic basis. Slope + spring, Ak + spring, Gyol + spring, Shen + spring, Dzor + spring, Sari + spring, Gegh + spring, Cross + spring, Poz + spring, • any other noun. Salt + spring, Sand + spring, Aren + spring, Light + spring, Mosh + spring, Lord + spring, Hov + spring, Iron + spring, Silver + spring, • personal name. for example: Toros + spring, Varam + spring, Pap + spring, • names of animals. Bear + spring, Dog + spring, Kakav + spring, Ul + spring.
The "adjective + noun" composition is also a meeting, in which we have separated two groups. 1 Hakobyan T., Melik-Bakhshyan St., Barseghyan H., Dictionary of Toponyms of Adjacent Regions of Armenia, vol. 1-5, Yerevan, 1986-2002.
 From now on, HTB.
• Qualitative or relative adjectives, for example: Warm + fountain, New + fountain, Cold + fountain, Thin + fountain, Short + fountain, Multiple fountain, Hot + fountain, • Color names, such as Yellow + fountain, White + fountain, White + source SJ + spring, Shek + spring.
There is an example of a "connection + noun" composition, for example, Tak + akpyur, it is possible, of course, that it is composed of the hot> component.
Among the complex words, the village called Anashaghbyur is of interest, which in all probability should be called Anush Aghbyur.
Toponyms are complex derivatives, which consist of two bases or roots, one suffix - Noraghbyurik.
Adjacent place-names consist of two words written separately from each other, and the source component can be a sentence or a postposition, in case of a three-component complexity, it can also be a semicolon.
 Such are: Two-component. Aghbyurak Verin, Aghbyur door, Aghbyur mountain, Fountain of Prayer, Fountain of Immortality, Gaston fountain, Gridzor springs, Goghots fountain, Yeghin fountain, Zorzor fountain, etc.
Three-component. King Gagik spring, spring of Targmanchats monastery, spring of Khazal connection, cross of Spitak spring, spring of forty children.
There are a few multi-component words: Gechik Gyaduk's fountain.
We have singled out a group of names that are used with sound-modified և soundless parallel versions of the components. • Lisaghbyur (spring, place of pilgrimage), Lusaghbyur (spring), • Norakhpyur (village), Noraghbyur (village), • Shoraghbyur (mountain peak), Shoraghbyur (village), Shoraghbyur (mineral spring), • Sarnakhpyur (river), Sarnakhpyur (village) ), Sarnakhpyur (village), Sarnaghbyur (spring), Sarnaghbyur (river), Sarnaghbyur (river), Sarnaghbyur (village), Sarnaghbyur (village), Sarnaghbyur (village), Sarnaghbyur (mountain peak), Sarnaghbyur (place), • Vardakhpyur ( village), Vardaghbyur (river), Vardaghbyur (village), Vardaghbyur (village), • Varzhaka spring (village), Varzhakats spring (village), Varzhak spring (village), Varzhanka spring (village), Varzhanke spring (village).
Almost all types of physical-geographical places, historical objects, settlements are named in Armenian by the toponyms of this composition.
 According to the nature, we have divided the toponyms into the following groups.1. Mountains, foothills, mountain peaks, wintering houses. .
2. Caves, valleys, valleys, depressions. Tsokni spring (valley), Aghbyurner gorge (depression), Avegh spring (valley).
3. Lakes, rivers, canals, springs, reservoirs. spring (fountain-monument), spring of Kostntut (spring), spring of Kovhoviv (spring), spring of Korek (spring), Kuraghbyur (lake), spring from Halch (spring), harem spring (spring), Huseinaghaghbyur (spring), Hornaghbyur (spring) ), Hovaghbyur (spring), "Calf spring" (spring), Ghzlchakhchakh spring (spring), Mamushegh spring (spring), Marghuliaghbyur (spring), Mets spring (spring), Mknkhoru spring (spring), Moshahaviaghbyur (spring), Moshaghbyur (spring), Near spring (spring), Beard spring (spring), Mukhal spring (spring), Mushaghbyur (river),Yotakan spring (spring), Seven brother spring (spring), Seven springs (spring), Navavor spring (spring), Nver spring (spring), Shaghasar spring (spring), Shataghbyur (spring), Shorshor spring (spring), Sarnaghbyur reservoir (reservoir).
4. Provinces, towns, villages: Anush Aghbyur (village), Avegh Aghbyur (village), Karchaghbyur (village), Karmiraghbyur Nerkin (village), Karmiraghbyur Verin (village), Kakavuts Aghbyur (village), Koraghbyur (village), Hatsyats Aghbyur (village), Hotats aghbyur (village), Mushaghbyur (village), Musheghghbyur (village), Yotaghbyurner (village), Noraghbyurik (village), Shenaghbyur (village), Shnaghbyur (village), Shoghan aghbyur (village).
5. Bridges. Cold spring.
6. Monasteries, sanctuaries, churches, places of pilgrimage. Astvatsatsin (monastery), Spitak spring spring cross (church), Spitak spring spring monastery (monastery), Vank light source (pilgrimage place), Tapas spring (pilgrimage place), Garnik spring (pilgrimage place), Dogh spring (pilgrimage place).
In Armenian, different objects can be called by the same name.
  It is also noticeable in the case of the toponyms we have examined: • Aknaghbyur: river-village, • Avzaghbyur, village-river, • Bazmaghbyur, fortress, village-village, • Yerkataghbyur, spring-mountain, • Twin spring-spring, settlement, village, ancient site, • Lusaghbyur: spring, hill, river, village, floodplain, place of pilgrimage, • Khachaghbyur: ruined village, summer house, river, mountain peak, place of pilgrimage, • Red spring: spring, river, village, • Kakavaghbyur: spring, winter house, • Dzoraghbyur: river , village, • Tsokni spring: Lernabazuk, dzor, • Shekaghbyur: village, mountain peak, • Paghaghbyur: spring, village, mountain peak, • Sariaghbyur: river, mountain, • S. spring: agarak, village, village, spring, river, • Spitak spring: spring, river, village, winter house, • Takaghbyur: spring, river, • Cold spring: spring, village.
Many beautiful legends are associated with toponyms with a source component.
  Here we have mentioned the place name և next to it and the legend, which we have divided into several conditional groups.
  We got them mainly from "Tradition" և HTB, so we did not make separate references.
1. Folk conversations.
• Crow spring (spring).
  The locals explain the origin of the name of this spring by a legend connected with Grigor Tatatsi.
 According to the legend, Gr. As a child, while grazing the lambs of Tat Monastery as a child, one day while drinking water from that spring, a snake wanted to bite him.
Seeing that, the crow throws itself into the spring.
  The snake bites Grigor to the crow.
  Tat's abbot buried the self-sacrificing crow near the spring and named it Crow's spring.
• Karchaghbyur (river).
 According to the folklore, the village was named this way because the spring from the hollow of the rock flows into the lake for a short time.
• Springs (springs).
  There used to be many springs here.
 The Naghi khan wore a caravan of camels and carried wool to all the springs in the cell so that his opponents would not have to look at those water-rich places.
• Poppy spring (spring).
  A hunter finds a parrot here, the chicks are average.
  At Satan's command, he destroys the nest and destroys the cubs.
 The mother parrot, seeing the destroyed trunk and the destroyed cubs, begins to mourn and cry.
  A fountain is formed from his tears, and he breathes a sigh of relief.
 Honest people bury the parrot, throw a stone at the grave, pass a new one under the stone, from which this cold spring begins to flow.
• Source (source) of Mahtes Melkum.
  Shah Abbas, liking the beautiful wife of Mahtes Melkum, forcibly takes her to his harem.
  After a while, missing his wife, Melkum went to Isfahan in disguise and began to work as a mason near the Shah's palace.
  Shah Abbas and his wife go out to play on the balcony.
 To attract the woman's attention, Melkum murmurs with a song: "My old sorrows have been repaired, bring this boy."
 The woman, recognizing her husband, throws the rope and answers with a song. "The past must be forgotten, or five or six dice."
Shah doubts that mysterious question and answer համար to try to allow the woman to see her husband for half an hour.
  Realizing this, Melkum's wife advised her husband to leave the Shah's palace, to build seven churches and seven fountains for the salvation of his soul.
  Melkum fulfills her wish.
  The spring near the Nerkin Agulis Dasht market is one of those springs, which is called Mahtes Melkumiaghbyur after the builder.
• Marash springs (springs).
 At one time, the Tatars attacked Marash, looted and massacred.
 Suddenly torrential rain begins "flooding all the streets of the city."
  Taking advantage of this, the Marash people attacked the Tatars and drove them out of the city.
 When everything calmed down, the people of Marash, fearing that the Tatars might return, left the city and climbed to the top of a nearby mountain.
  It is flooding here again with thunder and lightning.
  When everything calms down, the people of Marash go down to the city, where they find two new springs.
• Sun springs (springs).
  The waters of these springs are life-giving to Zzavakatur.
 Those who want to have a son drink from the east, those who want a girl drink from the west.
  Hence the name of the springs Areg (male Jeg).
• Source of ear pain (source).
  A hermit lived here.
During the agony, he sent the pastor to the Vardapetimot in front of him to receive the sacrament.
  The priest did not come.
  He became a stone with the hermitage և the Moks River started flowing from his mouth.
  Seeing that he had accomplished his task well, the hermit asked that a fountain come out of the fire in which he lived լինի it should be a remedy for ear pain.
 By the will of God, the second task of the hermit was fulfilled, and the source of the Earache began to emerge.
• Vardashenq spring (spring).
  A rich girl and a poor boy fall in love և vow to live together, to die together.
  The girl's parents find another, rich groom.
 A few days before the engagement, the girl and her mother-in-law go to the hill called Vardashenk to do field work.
  Here she finds her favorite boy և with him.
  Seeing this, the mother scolds and curses them.
  The boy and the girl desperately turn to God and ask him to turn them into rose bushes.
 Their task is fulfilled immediately.
 The girl's mother, full of revenge, appeals to the villains, who voluntarily grow a thorn between the two roses, preventing them from approaching each other.
  A fountain is formed from the tears of the lovers in Vardashenq, which is attributed a healing property.
• Raffi's spring (spring).
 Years ago, Raffi came to the village of Dahrav to write the story of the local heroes.
  He walks from house to house, asking questions and experimenting, reading the letters on the mossy stones.
 At Raffi's request, the villagers turn over the Armenian slab near Abrahams Park to read the inscriptions on it.
  After Raffi left, a lot of water started to come out of that slab.
  The joy of the people of Dahrav is immeasurable, because before that they had to go down to the nearby gorge to bring water.
 That water is still there - it is called Raffi's spring.
• Kalo spring (spring).
  It is said that this village did not have a spring before.
The villagers suffered without water and tried to find a way out.
  The wife of a man named Kalo dreams that there is a spring under their house.
 Kalo digs in that place for several days and finds the source.
  The village is coming out of a difficult situation.
 There is still that spring ով it is called Kaloyaghbyur after the finder.
• Deer spring (spring).
  According to the legend, every year a baby came here and sat by the water.
  The villagers considered it a sacrifice sent by God, butchered it and divided the meat among themselves.
 Once they violated that order, only two people took the meat.
 As if God was angry with that, he did not send another deer, but they continued to call the source Yeghnikiaghbyur.
• Lezgu source (source).
  During the Lezgins, the Armenians fled to the mountains, built a house for themselves and hid.
  They find a good spring on the mountain, cover it with bushes and secretly use the water.
 This spring is called Lezgu spring.
• Kosi spring (spring).
  According to the legend, an idolater caught with leprosy comes to the spring.
 An old man scolds him and promises to heal his wounds if he converts to Christianity.
  The patient agrees.
The old man hits the rock with a stick, և a spring comes from here.
  The patient is washed and treated.
 The name of the source remains Kos spring.
• Khazal communication source (source).
  This is a pure and abundant source. Nearby is a plane tree called the “Hidden Tree,” which is considered sacred.
  The nomads of the steppe who go to the pastures of Ishkhan Mountain with their herds, hoping for spring water, always come to these parts to dry the pastures and rob the surrounding inhabitants.
  In order to cut off the nomads from their sides, the residents of Khot, Shinuhair և Karahunj villages gathered the wool of their sheep for a year and closed the spring.
  Deprived of water, the nomads of the steppe did not come here anymore; the people got rid of their raid.
• Tokhpva source (source).
  A woman comes here to pray with her child.
  While praying, the baby cries and asks for water.
  In order not to interrupt the prayer, the mother asks God to quench the thirst of the child.
God hears his problem է springs a fountain in the chapel.
• Source (source) of Targmanchats monastery.
  While preaching Mesrop Mashtots in these parts, he hit the stick on the stone and ordered water to come out.
 And according to him, this source immediately came out.
2. Old beliefs.
• Anahit spring (spring).
  Legend has it that King Vachagan of Aghvank, meeting the beautiful and wise Anahit from Hatsik village near this spring, fell in love with her; from that day the name of the spring was called Anahit spring.
• Archak spring (spring).
  According to an Armenian tradition, the fiery woman (bride) who allegedly lived in Lake Artchak always bathed in this spring, and the one who drank the spring water was inflamed with pure love and acquired a sweet singing ability.
• Bear spring (spring).
 According to the legend, a bear came out of the forest of the village and started to climb to the top of Dizapayt.
  On the way he gets very thirsty and starts screaming.
 Suddenly a spring comes out of which, after drinking enough water, the bear continues to climb to the top of Dizapayt, but when it reaches, it is struck by lightning and falls to the ground.
 As if the name of the fountain connected with that - Bear fountain.
• "Source of tears" (source).
 This source allegedly arose from the tears of Patriarch Hakob Mtsbna, when he was about to throw his deacons into the sea.
• Welcome source (source).
  According to the legend, the tomb of Gr. Lusavorich was located here, as if by his miracle that spring came from the depths of the rock.
• Seven springs (springs).
  According to the legend, there was a monastery built here on seven columns, which was demolished by Lenktemur, after which a spring came from there.
• Raisin spring (spring).
  According to the legend, a young man always fills his pockets with raisins to see his girlfriend, comes here and waits for her.
 As if that is why the spring was called Chamchi spring.
• Source of hunger (source).
  It had cold and stagnant water, but because of the small current it was called the Source of Hunger.
• White spring (spring).
 According to the legend, David from Sassoun drank water from this spring.
• Garapa spring (spring).
  According to the source of the Armenian legend, orphaned through the rock, he erupted the son of the patriarch Noah named Sam.
• Vardenik spring (spring); It is said about the water of this spring that it has a wonderful power. Whoever washes and drinks, his hair is gilded like a soft shave.
 Those who have stones also come and drink from the water of this spring, from which the stone wears out and falls.
In this group we want to single out a series of legends, where a place bearing the same name according to geographical location, different legends: • Katnaghbyur (spring).
  Mesrop Mashtots dies in Etchmiadzin և Vahan Amatuni agrees to bury him in his native village Oshakan.
Legend has it that the undertakers, annoyed by the heat on the way, lowered the coffin to the ground to take a short break.
  And suddenly a fountain comes out of the fresh water.
  Everyone drinks, quenches their thirst ում Call it Katnaghbyur.
• Milk spring (spring).
  According to the legend, Our Lady had dripped a drop of her holy milk into that spring, for which the spring was called Katnaghbyur.
• Milk spring (spring).
 The lepers were treated with water from this spring.
• Milk spring (spring).
  Mothers came here to make milk.
• Milk spring (spring).
 In the epic "Sasna Tsrer" the power of the drinkers of this spring increased several tens of times.
• Light source (source).
 According to the legend, a blind man is treated here after being washed, restores his sight, the source of which is called Lusaghbyur.
• Photo source (source).
  Patriarch Aristakes was here at the meeting in Nicaea. Through prayer and miracles he sprung up a fountain with the water of which he was baptized and healed.
• Light source or fountain (source).
  The old, sick snakes come into that water at night, are treated and rejuvenated.
3. Traditions related to Christian saints.
• S. Jacob's spring (spring).
  According to the legend, St. From Hakobyartasuk.
 Water was considered sacred and healing.
• Hripsime spring (spring).
  According to the legend, St. Hripsime lived here, after whom the spring was named.
  Thousands of people came here for the summer.
• St. Jacob's spring (spring).
 According to Armenian tradition, it was named after a spring of the same name located on the northeastern slope of Mount Masis.
• Vardapet spring (spring).
  It is said that this spring was struck by a lone and chaste monk named Hovhannes by a partisan.
 That is why it was called Vardapet's spring.
• St. Jacob's spring (spring).
  According to the legend, when a locust or a caterpillar appeared, water was taken from this spring, scattered in the fields, after which the herds of squirrels appeared there and began to destroy the pests.
In our opinion, the examination shows that there are many place-names in Armenian with the "source" component, which, by compiling a series of rich and beautiful words, provide an inexhaustible source of material for folklore.
Hripsime Kostanyan LOCATIONS MADE WITH "SOURCE" COMPONENT IN ARMENIAN Keywords: source, component, place name, composition, tradition.
