RESEARCH ON THE EFFECT OF NON-WHITE HETEROYCLICAL AMINICS AND THEIR PEPTIDES TECHNOLOGY OF PROTEINASE K activity.
  Proteolytic enzymes are of great interest as pharmacological targets.
  Some of the most important proteolytic enzymes are trypsin, chymotrypsin and proteinase K.
All three are classified as serine proteases.
  Proteases were studied as early as the 18th century, and it was known that they could break down proteins.
  Serine proteases play a fundamental role in human physiological processes.
  On the other hand, they can cause a number of pathological conditions, so it is important to find specific protease inhibitors associated with the disease.
 Genetic and biochemical studies have shown that proteases are used by enviruses to bring their structural and functional proteins to maturity.
 Thus, in a living cell, the virus synthesizes a number of proteins, enzymes, including proteases, which hydrolyze the peptides synthesized by the virus in a unique way, the resulting proteins participate in the packaging of the virus genetic material, forming new virus particles that infect healthy new cells.
 Modern advances in genetic engineering have allowed scientists to use these enzymes as "molecular tools."
Natural non-protein amino acids և peptides.
  In living cells, non-protein amino acids are both free and composed of protein peptides.
 These compounds play a role in regulating processes in the body and ensuring normal cell life.
Among the biologically active compounds, non-protein amino acids and their peptides have a special place, which have recently been successfully used in medicine, pharmacy, bacteriology, science and other fields [2].
  Non-protein α-amino acids are physiologically active իտանի suitable for inclusion in drugs (in the form of optically active isomers only).
  Of more interest than non-protein amino acids are α-amino acids containing heterocyclic substituents of different radical structure, which are foreign to the body both in structure and in the nature of heteroatoms.
Non-protein α-amino acids are included in modern anti-tumor, hypertensive, analgesic, as well as other drugs that help eliminate alcohol-drug dependence and other drugs.
Serine proteases և protease inhibitors.
  All proteases catalyze the same reaction, peptide bond hydrolysis, but they exhibit selectivity depending on the substrate, the type of amino acid present at the hydrolyzed bond.
 Depending on the amino acids included in the catalytic group, various proteases have been identified, each of which can be included in one of the following four major functional classes: serine, asparagine, and cysteine ​​metalloproteases [3].
  Serine proteases are involved in many functions of the body, including coagulation, immune response, inflammatory processes, acting as digestive enzymes of eukaryotes and prokaryotes.
 Serine proteases, on the other hand, are involved in the development of multiple human pathogenic processes.
The position of the problem and the choice of research objects.
  The aim of the work was to determine (S) -β- [4- (furan-2-methyl) -3-butyl-5-thioxo-1,2,4-triazol-1-yl] α-alanine non-protein α-amino acid աթ new Synthesized N-formyl-methionylalanyl- (S) -alane α- [4 - (furan-2-yl-methyl) -3-butyl-5-thioxo-1,2,4-triazol-1-yl] α Antimicrobial properties of peptide and its effect on proteinase K-activity as a representative of serine proteases.
Research materials և methods.
  The following materials were used: Tritirachium album proteinase K (Sigma), HEPES (Sigma), 2% SDS, bull serum albumin (Sigma), non-protein α-amino acids (S) -β [4- (furan-2) -yl-methyl) -3-butyl-5-thioxo-1,2,4-triazol-1-yl] -α-alanine-containing peptide (N-formyl-methionyl-alanyl- (S) -β- [4 - (furan-2-yl-methyl) -3-butyl-5-thioxo-1,2,4-triazol-1-yl] -α-alanine (synthesized by YSU Asymmetric Synthesis Laboratory «" ArmBiotechnology "Scientific-Production by researchers at the Center's Non-Protein Amino Acid Synthesis Laboratory).
Determination of proteinase K activity.
 Proteinase K activity was measured by the number of free amino groups by the orthophthaldehyde method [6].
 The OFA reagent in a volume of 30 ml contained: 100 mmol / l boric acid buffer pH 9.7.5 mg / ml orthophtolaldehyde և 2.5 μl mercaptoethanol.
  Proteinase K released from T.album was dissolved in distilled water at a concentration of 10-20 mg / ml.
 200 μl of reaction medium with the following composition was used to measure proteinase K activity: 1 M Phosphate buffer pH 7.2 - 20 μl, 2% SDS - 20 μl, mercaptoethanol 100 mmol / l - 40 μl, enzyme - 20 μl, bull serum albumin (20 mg / ml) - 100 μl.
The reaction medium was stored for 30 minutes at 37 ° C (UTU 4-UNIVERSAL ULTRATHERMOSTAT Max. 200 ° C), then 50 μl of a solution was taken from each of the reaction mixture, to which was added 10 μl of acetic acid. և 30 minutes after the start of the wavelength reaction.
Then the following solutions were poured into each cuvette. H2O - 1.5 ml, reaction medium - 50 μl, OFA reagent - 1.5 ml.
 3-5 minutes later the A340 was registered.
The following formula was used to measure proteinase K activity: A = ∆A340 * V reaction medium / ε * (in an enzyme reaction medium) * ∆ t.
ε is the extinction coefficient calculated by comparing the standard solution (0.033 mmol / l methionine) with A340.
  The data were then recalculated for 1 mmol / l methionine solution. H2O - 1.5 ml, methionine - 10 ml, reagent - 1.5 ml.
To study the effect of non-protein amino acids on bacterial resistance to antibiotics, Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria were selected, including their recombinant strains, which carry plasmids resistant to various antibiotics.
 Used strains are represented by salt. 1. Table 1 StrainsEnvironmentMPAMPAMPAMPAMEnvironments.
  Measpeptone agar (MPA) was used to grow the crops listed in the table.
 20 g of agar was added to 1 liter of water, disinfected in a steam autoclave for 1 m. pressure. under 20 minutes.
Maintaining decontaminated conditions.
  Used Petri dishes and test tubes were previously disinfected for 120-180 minutes at 180-220 ,C in a drying cabinet.
  The microbiological needle, the lance, the glass cover were disinfected on the flame of the alcohol before using it, after processing with alcohol.
  In general, all stages of the experiment were performed in a disinfected environment with an alcohol flame to avoid infection.
Before performing the actual experiment, it is necessary to first obtain the recombinant strains of E.coli.
 The latter are obtained by the method of transformation, by which plasmid DNA with an antibiotic-resistant gene is transformed into competent cells.
Elimination technique.
  In order for the strains to be constantly fresh (to maintain activity), it is necessary to eliminate them.
  Removal is performed in the presence of the corresponding plasmid strain and the corresponding recombinant strain in a medium rich in MPA (meatpeptone agar).
  Before use, the medium is thawed and left to cool to some extent.
 The pH was checked, which should be 7.
 If necessary, if there was a pH deviation, NH4OH solution or HCl solution was added to bring the pH to the required level.
After the experiment, the crops were sorted according to their growth temperature in a thermostat (brand: TC-80 M-2, temperature: 37 ˚C).
Sowing technique.
  The sowing was done by single-layer agar method, microbiological needle (sterile) was taken from each culture. Մեջ In night tubes (sterile) 2 ml MP broth was prepared, which was stored for 1 day in a shaker at 37 ˚C.
 Then the lawn was sown (with a glass spatula) made by pouring 0.2 ml of night culture on the media, antibiotics were added to Petri dishes.
Placement of non-protein amino acid peptide on agar.
  In the case, non-protein amino acid crystals (which provide the concentration gradient during diffusion) were used, which were poured (sterile) onto the lawns of the respective cultures.
In the other case, non-protein amino acid solutions were used at a concentration of 50 μl at 5 mM, which were dropped onto the appropriate culture gases.
 The solutions were disinfected in a water bath for 30 minutes.
The results և their discussion.
  The effect of the studied substances on proteinase K has been studied by the two methods mentioned above [4].
 Determination of proteinase K activity according to the first method by free amino group The following data were obtained: Table 2. Effect of non-protein α-amino acids on proteinase K activity Compound Control (S) -β- [4- (furan-2-yl-methyl) - 3-Butyl-5-thioxo-1,2,4-triazol1-yl] -α-alanineProteinase K,% The table shows that the non-protein α-amino acid (S) -β- [4- (furan-2-yl-methyl) ) -3-butyl-5-thioxo-1,2,4-triazol-1-yl] -α-alanine inhibited the enzyme activity by 66.2%.
In the second phase, N-formyl-methionyl-alanyl- (S) -β [4 - (furan-2-yl-methyl) -3-butyl-5-thioxo-1,2,4-triazole-1- The study of the effect of α-alanine on the resistance of bacteria to antibiotics, ie whether the substance being tested in an antibiotic-containing medium had any effect on crop growth or not.
  Tested by placing their crystals in the MPA medium sown on the lawn of E.coli recombinant strains.
 The results are presented in salt. In 2.
N-Formyl-methionyl-alanyl- (S) -β- [4 - (furan-2-yl-methyl) -3-butyl-5-thioxo-1,2,4 triazol-1-yl] -α-alanine Effect on bacterial growthTable 3.Bacillus sp. (thermophilic) Compound N-formyl-methionyl-alanyl- (S) -β- [4- (furan-2-yl-methyl) -3-butyl-5-thioxo-1,2,4-triazol-1-yl] -α The aim of the experimental work was to find non-protein amino acids that could be used in the production of medicines, as potential antimicrobial resistance to bacteria, and as a result, they were obtained.
Literature 1. Saghyan A., Chemistry of amino acids, peptides and proteins, Yerevan, 2010, pp. 4, 11.
5. Rinderknecht H., Pancreatic secretory enzymes, in “The Pancreas.
 Biology, Pathobiology, and Hermine Avetisyan RESEARCH ON THE EFFECT OF NON-WHITE HETEROCYCLIC AMINIC ACIDS AND THEIR PEPTIDES WITH PROTEINASE K FERMINT BY ACTIVITY
