WORLDWIDE TRADE ORGANIZATION EXAMINATION: ALTERNATIVE OPTION FOR RESOLUTION OF COMMERCIAL DISPUTES 1 more relative
In the field of private international law, litigation has now given way to arbitration as the preferred option for commercial litigation.
 However, in the field of public international law, arbitration is rarely used as a procedure for reviewing disputes related to the interpretation or application of multilateral international agreements.
In the field of international public relations, arbitration is used as an alternative to dispute resolution within the framework of the World Trade Organization (WTO).
The procedure for applying for arbitration within the WTO is provided for in Article 25 of the Rules of Procedure։ Dispute Resolution (hereinafter referred to as the Agreement).
In this article, we will try to find out the specifics of arbitration within the WTO, as well as the fact whether arbitration within the WTO actually acts as an alternative to dispute resolution or not.
Pursuant to Article 25 1 1 of the Agreement, a speedy arbitration within the WTO, as an alternative method of dispute settlement, may facilitate the settlement of certain types of disputes that relate to issues clearly defined by both parties2.
Thus, on the basis of the above provision, we can state that the Agreement considers the arbitral proceedings as an alternative to the dispute resolution procedure by the Review Body's appellate body.
The following essential question follows from the above conclusion. Based on the content of the cited article, can we prove that an arbitration hearing within the WTO is competent or can be complete? 1 See “How far can arbitration practice as an alternative dispute resolution within the WTO go?” (electronic source: www.SSRN-id1676749.pdf, last viewed on 08.04.2014).
2 See Article 25 - Expeditious arbitration within the WTO as an alternative means of dispute settlement can facilitatethe solution of certain disputes that concern issues that are clearly defined by both parties.
to replace the dispute resolution procedure by the Ք Appeals Body's body, ie whether the arbitral tribunal at the WTO as a whole is an alternative to dispute resolution.
Before addressing the above issue, we consider it necessary to refer to Article 25 1 1 of the Agreement, which uses the term "settlement of certain disputes".
  Does the use of this term in the article mean that all commercial disputes falling within the jurisdiction of the WTO are subject to arbitration, or does it follow from the above provision that arbitration in the WTO is used only in the case of certain types of disputes?
The reason for the mentioned question is that the provision under discussion is not clearly formulated.
  As a result of such vague wording, Article 25 1 1 of the Agreement may be interpreted in two ways at once.
First, any commercial dispute can be examined by arbitrators, if the parties to the arbitration agreement have clearly agreed on the possibility for the arbitrators to consider the issues that are the basis for the dispute, ie it is important that the parties clearly state the specific issue in their arbitration agreement. has jurisdiction to review the arbitration.
Second, the article under discussion can also be interpreted as follows: Only certain types of commercial disputes are subject to arbitration, which are provided for separately in the other articles of the Agreement; apart from those disputes, no other dispute is subject to arbitration within the WTO.
Analyzing the content of the provision under discussion in more detail, let us once again refer to the term "certain disputes" used in that provision.
 The use of this term in the article immediately excludes the interpretation mentioned in the first version, as otherwise the article should have been written as follows: can facilitate the resolution of disputes that relate to clearly defined issues between the two parties1.
That is, the words "certain" in the first version should not have been mentioned in the original in order to be able to assert that any dispute under the jurisdiction of the WTO could be considered by arbitration.
Consequently, the second option becomes more legal, that is, only those disputes are subject to arbitration, which are envisaged by the agreement on the rules and procedures governing the Dispute Resolution or other agreements of the WTO.
But here another question arises. What kind of disputes are subject to arbitration within the WTO?
There is no separate article in the agreement that clearly and comprehensively defines the types of disputes that can be settled through arbitration, but after examining a number of articles in the agreement, we can state that two types of disputes can be settled within the framework of the arbitration procedure.
 Thus, Article 21 of the Agreement, which establishes the procedure for overseeing the implementation of the recommendations of the Dispute Settlement Body և decisions և, states that if immediate implementation of the recommendations հնարավոր decisions is not possible, the interested party must have a reasonable time to implement them.
The same article defines what a reasonable term is.
 Thus, a reasonable period of time is: 1. The period proposed by the Member State concerned concerned, approved by the Dispute Settlement Body or without the approval of that body.
2. The period within 45 days after the relevant proposals or decisions have been mutually agreed by the parties, or in the absence of such agreement.
3. The period set by the mandatory arbitration within 90 days after the adoption of the proposals առաջարկ decisions.
Thus, on the basis of the above, we can state that the parties may apply to the arbitral tribunal if, for example, they fail to set a reasonable time limit for the execution of the proposals և decisions1.
The second type of dispute between Member States, the examination of which allows the Agreement to be submitted to arbitration, depending on the level or nature of the obligations settled.
  Thus, under Article 22 6 6 of the Agreement, if a member objects to the level of suspensions applied or states that the principles or procedure referred to in paragraph 3 of the same Article have not been taken into account in applying such suspensions, the matter may be referred to arbitration.
Apart from the above two cases, the Agreement does not provide for any other type of dispute, the examination of which may be submitted to arbitration, therefore, based on the above, we can state that only two types of disputes can be examined within the WTO. the first in relation to the establishment of a reasonable time required for the implementation of the adopted recommendations, and the second in relation to the level or nature of the suspended obligations.
Thus, in such circumstances, when only two types of disputes within the WTO can be settled by arbitration, which arise already after the settlement of the main commercial dispute, can we claim that arbitration is an alternative method of dispute settlement within the WTO?
When we mention the fact that one event is an alternative, we understand that that event in its entirety can replace another event.
 In this case, the arbitral tribunal shall not replace the Examiner or the appellate body in the dispute before the WTO, and shall not serve as an alternative to the latter, as it is used only to settle disputes arising out of the relevant acts adopted by the latter during the settlement of the main commercial dispute.
Thus, the main commercial dispute within the WTO has not been resolved through arbitration at present, և only those disputes arising out of the main dispute, disputes are subject to arbitration.
1 See A Handbook on the WTO dispute settlement system, Cambridge, 2004, p. 95.
The analysis posted on the WTO official website referred to the above question, clearly stating that arbitration is not used within the WTO as an alternative to the Dispute Settlement Procedure by the Review Board or the Appellate Body.
  It is used in the implementation phase of the decisions adopted by the two above-mentioned dispute resolution bodies1.
Therefore, based on the above, as well as the practice established in the WTO, we find that Article 25 աձայն 1 of the Agreement considers arbitration as an alternative to resolving certain disputes, but in reality arbitration cannot be considered as an alternative to dispute resolution within the WTO. Moreover, it acts as a separate, independent procedure for resolving disputes during the implementation of decisions or recommendations.
Arbitration should not be considered as a procedure to assist other dispute resolution bodies in the WTO, as arbitration is essentially an independent procedure in the examination of the two types of disputes referred to in the Agreement.
Thus, generalizing the above, we find that arbitration within the WTO is an independent procedure for the examination of certain types of disputes, which operates independently of the Examiners և with the aim of preventing or resolving disputes arising during the implementation of recommendations or decisions.
  At the same time, considering the arbitration examination as an independent procedure for the examination of disputes, we would like to emphasize that the analysis of the articles of the Agreement gives grounds to claim that the arbitration examination within the WTO is quite broadly independent.
Thus, according to Article 25 2 2 of the Agreement, the fact of arbitration must be the subject of a multilateral agreement between the parties, where the arbitration procedure must be agreed.
 In addition, all members must be notified of the arbitration agreement before the actual commencement of the arbitral proceedings so that interested parties may, if they so wish, be able to take part in that examination2.
The Agreement requires Member States to notify the Dispute Settlement Body of the Arbitration Agreement signed by the parties, but the Agreement does not require the Agreement to be ratified by the relevant WTO bodies. they do not even have.
Arbitration Decision WT / DS160 / ARB25 / 1 in the case of "United States - Section 110 (5) of the US Copyright Act" on 09.11.2011 on the above-mentioned issue 1 See "ArbitrationpursuanttoArticle 25 oftheDSU" (electronic source: http.
//www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/disp_settlement_cbt_e/c8s2p1_e.htm, last viewed on 10.04.2014).
2 See Smbatyan A., International Trade Disputes in GATT / VTO.
  Selected Solutions (1952-2005), Moscow, 2006, p. 33.
3 This case was the first since the establishment of the WTO when members under Article 25 of the WTO applied to arbitration.
referred, noting the following: "The parties to this dispute should have only informed the Dispute Settlement Body about applying to the arbitration.
  No decision shall be required by the Dispute Settlement Body to have the case referred to arbitration under Article 25.
  The lack of multilateral oversight of this provision obliges arbitrators to personally ensure that it complies with the rules and principles governing the WTO system.
 As noted by the United States - Anti-Dumping in Case No. 191623, it is a widely accepted rule that the International Court of Justice itself has jurisdiction to decide on its own initiative.
 Arbitrators are confident that this principle can be applied to the arbitral tribunal.
Thus, it was clearly emphasized that the Dispute Settlement Body does not currently have any authority to determine the scope of arbitration, and the arbitrators themselves are obliged to address their own jurisdiction in each specific case.
However, in this case a rather significant question arises as to how the WTO, acting in the person of its respective bodies, should act if it considers that the issue on which the parties have reached an Agreement on Arbitration is outside the scope of the arbitration.
The issue raised is not regulated within the framework of the Agreement, which is a rather serious issue, as no problems have arisen so far with the scope of powers of the WTO Examination Board, the Appellate Body and the arbitral tribunal, but a similar issue is not ruled out in the future.
 A situation may arise where Member States submit to arbitration under an Arbitration Agreement that is outside the scope of an arbitration within the WTO.
  In this case, the Dispute Settlement Body has no authority to rescind the Agreement.
Thus, it is obvious that there is a legal loophole within the framework of the Agreement, which requires a clear regulation at the legal level.
In connection with the issue raised, we consider it necessary to make an addition to the Agreement, clearly stating that the Agreement between the parties on arbitration must be ratified by the Dispute Settlement Body, after which the arbitration can only begin.
  This addendum will enable the Dispute Settlement Body to monitor the legality of the arbitral proceedings, and not to approve agreements that are inconsistent with the provisions of the Agreement.
Referring to the independent nature of the arbitral proceedings, let us refer to the issue of the independence of the arbitral awards.
Article 25 of the Agreement provides that the arbitral award shall be consistent with the WTO Agreements; it shall not eliminate or invalidate the advantage granted to any of the Members under those Agreements or impede the acquisition of the items covered by those Agreements.
1 See “United States - Section 110 (5) of the US Copyright Act - Recourse to Arbitration under Article 25 of theDSU” (electronic source: www.160ARB25-1.pdf, last viewed 10.04.2014).
However, the same Agreement does not contain any provision on how or which body will oversee the compliance of arbitral awards, decisions, WTO agreements, especially when the arbitral awards are not subject to appeal, moreover, those decisions are not even subject to approval by the Review Board or the appellate body.
In other words, the Agreement does not provide a mechanism for the possibility of revoking the decisions of arbitrators in conflict with the WTO agreements.
  Then we can state that the decisions of the arbitrators are endowed with independence within the framework of the WTO.
At the same time, it should be noted that in the absence of adequate oversight and influence mechanisms over arbitrators' decisions, a rather difficult situation can arise within the WTO, as it is possible that the arbitrators will make a decision that contradicts the WTO agreements. անդամ The WTO should take action to address this issue.
 Therefore, we consider it necessary to envisage within the framework of the Agreement the competence of the Dispute Settlement Body to approve the decisions of the arbitrators in an expedited procedure, during which the conflicting decisions will simply not be approved by the Dispute Settlement Body.
Thus, summarizing our study, we can state that the WTO arbitration proceedings are significantly different from the arbitration proceedings familiar to us, in particular, arbitrators have the right to hear any commercial dispute arising out of the application of the WTO agreements.
  Moreover, referring to the WTO arbitration procedure, we can state that the arbitration procedure was not sufficiently regulated in the agreement on the rules and procedures governing the Dispute Settlement, which in practice can cause quite serious problems.
  Therefore, we find that the infrequency of the arbitration proceedings within the WTO is due, first of all, to the lack of clear legal formalities, not regulating certain issues.
  In the face of such legal uncertainty, Member States often simply do not have a clear idea of ​​the arbitration procedure, the scope of its powers.
Ani AtanesyanWORLD TRADE ORGANIZATIONALITIZATIONAL EXAMINATION: DETERMINATION OF ALTERNATIVE RESOLUTIONS ON ACCOUNTING, ALTERNATIVE OPTIONS
