BUT SIMPLE AND COMPLEX TEMPERATURES IN ARGIS'S SPEECH Literary language with its pure և pure form serves more limited people.
  And dialects, being naturally developed, linguistic phenomena arising in a certain historical period, serve the larger masses of the people.
 As A. writes. Gharibyan, "Dialects are of a local dialect nature, they are limited to one region or one or two villages" 1.
  There are many differences between Armenian dialects.
  Even geographically adjacent dialects are significantly different from each other.
 There are big differences from village to village.
 What is typical of the dialect of a village is often not typical of the dialect of a neighboring settlement.
HR. Acharyan և բար Other dialectologists give special importance to the differences in the current composition of the border weather2.
  This approach to the classification and study of dialects is scientific, with a justified history.
 In the article we have tried to examine the simple և compound tenses of the verb in the dialect of Artchis village of Tavush region.
  And since the verb is one of the main members of the sentence, in order to get a deeper and more comprehensive picture of the given word, it is necessary to study the features of the present tense, the features of the present tense, the composition of the verbs, the usage, the perfect, the perfect, the negative.
The main differences in the verbal system compared to modern literary Armenian can be expressed by the following points: • Differentiation of the conjugation forms of the infinitive verbs, • Existence of the Old Graphic type, • Exclusive of the inflection of the inflection of the infinitive verbs. Existence of a horse derby, • Simple composition of the past imperfect tense, • Postpositional use of negative particles, • Prepositional use of negative past participle verbs, • Similarity of the past imperfect tense of the border tense to the past tense of the past participle of the past participle.
There are 7 out of 8 verbs of modern Armenian in the dialect of Artchis: indefinite, subjunctive, participle (of time), perfect, imperfect, va 1 Gharibyan A., Armenian dialectology, Yerevan, 1947, p. 5.
2 Jahukyan G., Introduction to Armenian Dialectology, Yerevan, 1972, p. 104.
ghagakar մեկ ևs one, horse derby.
 The aparnay derby is absent, as the meaning of the adverbial adverb is expressed through forced time periods.
  So, I will bring, I would bring the horses.
  However, in the speech we find drinking water, throwing clothes, reading a book աթիվ many similar horses, և at first sight there is a contradiction about the fact that the above-mentioned old lady's derby is absent.
 The existence of such's is explained by the use of the indefinite article sex, which is used as a determinant in the sentence.
In the dialect of Artchis, the indefinite article has e (ie), a, i և and the verbs, for example, to wash, to wash, to take, to speak, to sit.
  Not only the Artchis dialect, but also a number of villages in Alaverdi and Noyemberyanim, such as Koti, Berdavan, Shnogh, etc., have such an indefinite derby.
 In these speeches, in fact, all the idioms of Grabar have been preserved.
 The verbs e rtslutyan are numerous in the Artchis dialect և mainly correspond to the verbs of rtsurdutyun in modern literary Armenian.
  The verbs in the verb form a relatively small number, of which are: sit // sit, speak // talk, sleep // sleep, carry // carry.
 It has been preserved in the verb I have in the verb I have.
Most of the verbs of Grabarian's adverb in Artchis dialect, in contrast to the literary Armenian, in which the adverbs of predominance are predominant, have changed in the case of most of the verbs, for example aganil // wear-wear-wear, find // find-gidnul, hasanil // reach-reach , enter // enter-enter.
  The verb Grabaryanarnul, in contrast to the dialects of other nearby settlements, has preserved its egg.
  The verbs to get drunk և to be afraid have become just to hit, to be afraid.
  Grabaryan and ltsurdutyun appear to leave // ​​to leave in the verb.
Out of the indefinite particles, only il, el, al, analz are active in speech1.
  The other particles, nil, nul, chil nal, enal are petrified, they are used in only a few verbs, they do not form new words.
  Let's take some examples of such petrified horses. to pass, to shake // to shake, to look // to think և etc.
  In speech, the indefinite article is used as a noun.
  When used in the present tense, the indefinite article is articulated and plotted and, by conjugation, occupies other positions in the sentence, problem,, for example, "Crying is not a good thing" (subject), "He thinks about eating and drinking" (problem).
  In verb usage, the indefinite article participates in a number of tenses: compulsory past participle, past participle negative, conditional negative past participle, negative past participle past participle imperative.
In the dialect of an imperfect derby, it is formed with the ending of whom: break, leave, go, speak, etc.
  Only two words: to come and give imperfect 1 Asatryan M., Lori speech, Yerevan, 1968, page 116.
The derby is formed by my ending, which is put on an indefinite horse, comes, gives.
 An imperfect verb has only a verb usage.
 He participates in the present tense of the borderline weather: I come, I give, I speak, I cry և and so on.
In the dialect of the prepositional artichoke, as in other dialects of neighboring regions, it is formed by the suffix e / el, which is placed on the indefinite verb of the verbs ending il, el, and nul, chil, al, ending in verbs ending in anal, for example, sit-sit , to speak, to hear, to hear, to wear, to wear, to run away, to run away, to wash, to wash, to get wet, etc.
  Prepositional verb has only a verb usage. It participates in the composition of the prepositional preposition և past prepositional tenses, for example, I have been, I have been // I have been, I have been, I have been, and so on.
In the Artchis dialect, the adverb is formed by a suffix, which is based on the verb according to the same rules as in the prepositional derby, for example, sitting, listening, wearing, taking, running, washed, raised, etc.
Common derby is made up of all the verbs of the passive-neuter gender, which indicate a state or a past participle, for example, read, written, sitting, burning, etc.
 Intransitive verbs that do not reflect these features are not usable.
  The common derivation, as in modern literary Armenian, in Archis's dialect և can have a nominal use, appearing in the sentence with the positions of subject, determiner, problem, for example, read a book, do not forget what has been read, etc.
The subjunctive derivative is formed by the suffix -ogh, which is placed on the basis of all verbs, instead of the indefinite derivatives -il, -el, -al և -ul, for example, izatel-izatogh, grel-writer, diesel-dizogh.
 The subjunctive verb does not take part in the composition of the tenses; it has only a nominal usage, appearing in the sentence as a decisive, subject, problem, for example, a dying person, the fugitive was caught, etc.
The conjugation is formed by the suffix -is, which is based on the indefinite, for example, when saying, going, coming, giving, etc.
  In M. Asatryan's book "Lori Speech" the accomplice derby is called the derby of time, because during the demonstration the time of the main action was performed, for example, when he ran out of the house he forgot the blanket // he forgot the keys when leaving the house.
  The conjugation is used in the sentence to be // to be with the verb, composing secondary tenses: it comes, it comes // it comes, it reads it // it reads, it does what it does // it's talking և and so on.
The derivation of d is formed by the suffix -en, which is placed on the indefinite, moreover, in the case of verbs ending in il, -il is changed to -el, for example, from sitting-sitting, speaking-speaking, etc.
  The horse derby shows the horse performing the action, coming from singing a // singing.
  With that, you look like an indefinite sex clip.
But in the dialect of Artchis, there are 5 ways: borderline, wishful, conditional, compulsory և imperative.
The borderline weather in Archis's dialect has 5 tenses: present, imperfect past, prepositional, prepositional past և perfect past.
 In modern literary Armenian, the first 4 are composed վում are formed with enderba և auxiliary verb, and the past perfect is simple վում is formed with ebay-based և frontal endings, then in Artchis's dialect the past imperfect tense is clear: write, read, speak, say, etc.
  The present's supporters are: I, I, I, we, you, they are.
  The past participles of the auxiliary verb are: was, were, was, were, were, were.
  They are also useful when, except for the singular third person, the auxiliary verb e falls into the other faces: i, ir, er, he, ik, in.
  In the parable of the deepening of the frontier, some linguists mark the past tense of the past tense.
  In our article we will also present the composition and humility of those times.
In the case of a positive conjugation, the present tense of the boundary tense is formed by the present tense of the imperfect derivative, auxiliary verb, for example, I gather //
The past imperfect, as we have already mentioned, in contrast to the modern Armenian language, is a simple tense և resembles the Grabar imperfect, that is, it is not formed with a derivative-auxiliary verb, but with a verb-end և endings, for example,
This past imperfect egg, be it the direct continuation of the Grabar imperfect or a new grammatical egg developed on the basis of dialect, is one of the most interesting phenomena of Archis's speech.
The prepositional tense is formed by the prepositional derby և with the auxiliary verbs's, for example, gnnats emgnnats esgnats
The past tense of the past tense is formed by the past participle of the past participle of the auxiliary verb,, for example, I was washed // you were washed // you were washed, you were washed // you were covered // you were covered //.
The past perfect is a verb in the case of verbs ending in il // el, it has the suffixes of,, -ir, -, -ink, -ik, -s, with the suffix, for example, նստէցինստէցիրնըստէցնըստէքնըստէցիկնըցեցին.
In the case of the conjugation verbs A, the past perfect is again the past participle, with the participle և with the same endings, for example, read-read-read-read-read-read.
Verbs with the null, chill ending in the past perfect և lose their suffixes in the forms formed from it.
  The past perfect is formed on a non-existent, radical basis with the suffixes -ra, -ar, -av, ank, -ak, -an, for example, runaway runaway runaway runaway.
The conjugation of horses with the consonant -and- of the consonant's is different from simple conjugation verbs in that in the past perfect, in the's base's, the suffix n is changed to ts, the third person of the present tense of which has the -av ending, for example. ,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,
As we have already mentioned, some linguists classify the past participle as the past participle of the past tense.
  The present tense is formed by the conjugation verb և auxiliary verb present և.
  Ordinary verbs usually have relative tenses. // they were exhausted erb.
The lingering weather is quite close to the lingering weather of the Egyptian Armenian language in terms of its composition and manifestations.
  In the case of verbs ending in the future tense of the verb's, it is formed on the basis of the verb և -em, -es, -e, -enk, -ek, with those endings, for example, BizhanemBijanesBizhanebejzanenkBizhanekBijane.
In the case of verbs ending in il, chil, the suffixes -im, -is, -i, -ink, -ik, -in are added to the verb-base, for example, nstimnnstisnistinstinqstnikstinst.
1 Asatryan M., page 123.
In the case of verbs ending in Al, anal, -am, as, -a, -ank, -ak, -an are added to the verb, for example, forget-forget-forget-forget-forget-forget.
In the case of verbs ending in Ul, the suffixes in -um, -us, -u, -unk, -uk, -un are added to the verb base, for example, arnarnarusarnarunarknarukarnun.
Since we have already mentioned that in Artchis's dialect, the past imperfect is similar to the past tense of the past tense, we do not separate the past participle for the past tense.
 The meaning of the past participle of Eghdzakan can be expressed through the past participle of the past, for example, Ernak took me with him // I wish he took me with him, What would happen if you took him // What would happen if you took him?
The conventional tense consists of the past participle of the verb, with the past participle, for example, will speak to the speaker to the speaker to the speaker to the speaker.
Moreover, in the case of adjoining verbs, the moderator k or k, naturally, gets the second part of the conjugation, the verb-particles, for example, depending on whether they are dependent or not.
I will hang // I will hang I will hang I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I will I
 In the case of forced weather, the moderator is placed on the present frontal extremities, for example, to paint a team, to paint a house, to paint a house, to paint a house, to paint a house.
Equally useful is the present tense of the past tense tense, for example, it must be drawn, it must be drawn, it must be drawn, it must be drawn, it must be drawn, it must be drawn. They painted the house.
For the past tense of the past և we need the past participle + the prepositional structure of the past.
The imperative mood In Artchis's dialect, the verbs ending in anal, chil, nul are formed from the indefinite base - in, and the plural imperative is formed from the past perfect tense, with those endings, as in literary Armenian, for example, sit-and-talk.
The imperative singular of the verb A is made up of the present tense with the ending, and the plural is formed from the past perfect tense with the ending, e.g.
The imperative singular of the conjugation verbs is formed from the present tense with the ending. and the plural, from the perfect past tense, you end with, for example, write, write.
  The composition of the imperative singular of the verb is interesting, that is, bi!
In the Artichis dialect, in contrast to literary Armenian, the negative particles are placed after the derivational forms և bowing verbs.
 This is one of the most striking features of Archipelago.
The negative of the auxiliary verb is formed by the particle ch. In the present tense in the present participle // not in the present participle // in the present participle //
few // iqchein // in.
Only the auxiliary verb becomes negative during the composition of the negative tense of the compound tenses of the definite tense, for example, I have not come, I have not spoken, I have not spoken, I have not, I have not, etc.
The denial of the past perfect perfect tense is formed by the participle, which is again placed after the inflected verb, for example, gretsivoch, mnatsi voch, eka voch, etc.
  The negation of the conditional past participle ժամանակ past participle is formed by the indefinite past participle and the auxiliary verb tense or the past participle negation forms, for example, I will not write, I will not speak, we will not speak, we will not speak, we will not speak.
 In the past tense the past participle of the indefinite past participle is formed by the negative past participle of the indefinite past participle յալ again the postposition.
 The negatives of this moderator are the present tense, the present tense, the present participle, the present participle, the present participle, the present participle, the present participle, the present participle, the present participle, the present participle, the present participle.
The inhibitory imperative is formed by indefinite derivatives,, mek particles, which have a backward position, for example, to go a // mek, to read a // mek, to break a // mek և etc.
Secondary compound tenses are quite widespread in the Artis dialect.
  They are composed of conjugated և adverbs և to be // to be with the bowed verbs, for example, I am going, I am reading, I am singing, and so on.
Mariam MartirosyanBE SIMPLE AND COMPLEX TEMPERATURES IN THE BEAR'S SPEECH Keywords: derby, bow, weather, weather, particle, conjugation, speech, simple և compound tense.
