ABOUT MINING PROSPECTS FOR SWINE MINING SYSTEM More than 60% of the world's copper and molybdenum reserves are associated with copper-porphyry ores.
  Approved global copper reserves, according to the US Geological Survey, 2014 As of January, they amounted to 690 million tons.
 The top three in terms of reserves include Chile, Australia and Peru.
Copper-porphyry mines with copper reserves of up to 1 million tons are considered small, 1-5 million tons are medium, 5-10 million tons are large and large, and 10 million tons are more unique.
In the literature we can find the term "copper-molybdenum", which is synonymous with the name "copper-porphyry" for the mines where molybdenum has industrial significance.
 60% of the annual copper production also falls on this type.
 In addition to the basic elements, copper and molybdenum, these ores produce significant amounts of gold, silver, rhenium, and bismuth.
The deposits are large deposits of poor copper, molybdenum-copper ores in the form of post-magmatic hydrothermal deposits.
 The content of useful components in these mines is: Copper: 0.2 to 1.3-1.5%, molybdenum - 0.003-0.05%, gold - 0.002 to 1.21.5 g / t, silver - 0.2-5 g / t.
  Copper-porphyry mines are exploited in an open way, using highly productive technical means և equipment.
  The annual productivity of the mines by mountain mass can reach tens of millions of tons, which can drastically change the terrain.
 Their exploitation causes significant ecological damage to the environment, as the mining plant includes a concentrator with its tailings (s), as well as large dumps of non-conditional ores and waste rock.
Copper-porphyry ores are originally associated with porphyry intrusions of granitoid composition, usually formed after crystalline granitoids.
 Mineralization is formed immediately after the introduction of small porphyry intrusions and accumulates in their apical masses.
  Porphyry intrusions, volcanic rocks, mineralization, which are placed in favorable tectonic conditions, are usually a monogamous system.
  These systems are located in volcanic-plutonic zones [6, 8].
  The latter are linearly stretched regions with intensive J / or intensive volcanic processes, which are formed in unique geotectonic conditions of the continental shelf.
 Based on the type of volcanic-plutonic belt կազմ composition of mineral porphyry intrusions, A. Krivtsov divides the regions of copper-porphyry mines into four types ․1. Epicratonic. correspond to the old marginal masses ևEarly consolidation blocks, where porphyry intrusions are represented by granodiorite-granite formations, which are characterized by high molybdenum contents, 2. Epimygeosynclinal. sediment-based (myogeosynclinal), where porphyry intrusions are represented by granodiorite-monzonite composition, 3. Epievgeosynclinal. on a volcanic basis (eugosynclinal), where porphyry intrusions are represented by granodiorite composition, 4. Evgeosynclinal. in archipelago zones corresponding to the barrier zones of the eugeosynclinal,
The first three types of deposits belong to the andesitoid volcanic-plutonic zones, and the last eugenosynclinal type to the basaltoid ones [2,4].
The most common of the mining models in question is the Luell և Ջ տարած The "monzonite" developed by Gilbert և V ․ Holister co-developed "diorite" models.
 The monzonite model is typical for the mines of "1" և "2" type zones of the andesitoid volcanic-plutonic zones, and the diodorite model is typical for the mines of the "3" և "4" type zones [2, 4-6].
The main stages of copper-porphyry ores occur during sharp pressure fluctuations in the wide temperature range from 650-600 to 200-150 0C [10].
 The formation of minerals takes place within the boundaries of geochemical barriers, under conditions of sharp temperature and pressure drop.
 The mineral composition of copper-porphyry ores is quite clear.
  The most common copper minerals in the primary ores are mainly chalcopyrite և bornite.
  In addition, there may be energy and luconite, which are of secondary importance.
 The only industrial mineral of molybdenum is molybdenite.
 The mines are characterized by oxidation and secondary enrichment zones.
Most of the world's copper-porphyry ores are located on a planetary scale in the following three metallurgical zones: Pacific, Mediterranean-Asian (Tethys) and Kazakh-Mongolian (Paleothetes).
The territory of the Republic of Armenia is included in the Mediterranean sub-zone of the Lesser Caucasus.
From the point of view of copper-porphyry ores, the territory of the Lesser Caucasus is clearly divided into two fundamentally different structural-formation zones.
  The first is the Armenian-Karabakh zone, which is a Euro-chalk archipelago structure, where epivevgeosynclinal-type mines are developed.
 The second is the Eocene Pliocene formed in the Hankavan-Zangezur zone, which is considered to be the northern activated part of the Iranian sub-platform, where epicraton-type deposits are developed [2, 4].
  One of the unique mines in the world is located here, the Kajaran copper-molybdenum mine, where 7% of the world's molybdenum reserves are located.
 Copper-porphyry mineralization is present in the mentioned structural-metallurgical zones, which differ from each other in the composition of porphyry intrusions, copper, molybdenum and gold contents.
The above-mentioned models are also typical of the RA copper-porphyry mines.
In particular, the mines located in Hankavan-Zangezur zone (Kajaran, Hankavan, Agarak, etc.) correspond to the "monzonite" model.
  The deposits accumulated in the Georgian-Karabakh zone (Teghut, etc.) belong to the "diorite" model of formation [2].
The ores described are very typical of the horizontal իգ vertical orthogonalization, which is expressed by the substitution of emolybdenum ores with copper-molybdenum, copper, lead-zinc, as in the plan, from the center of the ore to the ridges from the center to the ridges.
R. was one of the first to refer to zoning. Silito, and I. Pavlova developed a universal series [6, 7] "A range of zones proposed for the proposed mines" by Kirkham and Sinclair.
  It includes R ․ The zonalities developed by Silito և I-Pavlova և give a more pictorial description of the placement of mineralizations in the mineral system.
  The zoning of such mineralization is also expressed in some mines of the Republic of Armenia.
Taking into account the above, the peculiarities of the placement of different mineralizations in the Lejan ore-magmatic system are discussed below.
 A number of researchers have worked in this area, H. Maghakyan (1943), A. Schmidt (1978), M. Isakhanyan (1982), E. Malkhasyan (1989), H. Tumanyan (2002) և others.
 The information about the mineral clothing is taken from their printed and handwritten works.
The Lejan mineral junction is located in the Lori region of the Republic of Armenia, is part of the Georgian-Karabakh structural-formation zone in the northwestern part of the Alaverdi mineral region.
The ore-magmatic system is located at the intersection of the north-western (longitudinal), northeastern (transverse) "semicircular" faults, occupying about 140 sq. Km. km area.
 The separation of the node is based on structural-mineralogical features, as well as geochemical-geophysical anomalies.
 Its boundaries include the large volcanic-plutonic depressive structure, as evidenced by the negative gravitational anomaly (A. Schmidt et al., 1978).
 The depressive structure, which occupies about 80-85 sq.m. km area, consists of medium-layer Eocene-age dacite and andesite-dacite tuffs with mixed layers of breccias, based on a strong layer of conglomerates և tuff breccias.
 In the northeast, these rocks are separated by a layer of semi-circular fossils of middle Eocene tuff sandstones, alroliths, calcareous dolomitized sandstones, dacitic ignimbrites and dacitic tuffs.
 In the southern part there is a domed structure, which is separated from the concave structure by a secondary semicircular fault.
  This dome-like elevation consists of Middle-Upper Eocene andesitic-basaltic tuffs, conglomerates, sandstones, dacite-andesitic lavas.
 The structure occupies about 2225 sq.m. km area.
 Intrusive bodies are exposed along the semicircular faults of the volcanic depressive structure.
 In the western part of the fault, the Upper Eocene-Neogene granodiorites, which are about 1 sq. Km. km area.
  Along the fault to the north are two outlets of granite porphyry, respectively 0.08 և 0.3 sq. M. km.
 Then, to the north-east, there are sub-volcanic, dacite porphyries of Middle Eocene height.
  There is an outlet of granite-porphyries in the south-eastern part of the secondary semicircle fault, 0.2 sq.m. km area.
Thus, in the weakly erosive section of the depression (north, northeast), the sub-volcanic bodies are exposed, and in the deeper parts of the erosive section (north-west to south-west), the abyssal-hypabisal intrusive formations.
In the central part of the Depression Mineral System, at a depth of 600 m above the surface, geophysical studies predict a large intrusive body of acidic composition, which probably corresponds to the intrusions of the granodior composition exposing the edges of the semicircular fault.
  The intrusive body is intersected by a small intrusion of porphyry-like granite, the exit of which is fixed in the center of the Mets Dzor mineral field.
The copper-porphyry mineralization of the Lejan deposit is associated with a small intrusion of porphyry-like granites.
  This connection is in line with the latest developments related to copper-porphyry mineralization.
  It should be noted that these statements are based on R. Silito, V. On the results of the analysis of Sinclair և others, as well as in Mets Dzor.
The mineral field of Mets Dzor is located in the central part of the node.
It is located at the intersection of northwestern (longitudinal) and northeastern (transverse) faults, occupying about 40 sq. Km. km area.
  The field is clearly underlined by hydrothermal variation, which is represented by a propylated և sericitized mass.
  Pyrite and quartz are widespread here, typical of copper-porphyry ores.
 The mineral field is bordered by geochemical and geophysical anomalies.
  At its edges, local negative gravimetric anomalies coincide with the anomalies of the geochemical primary crowns of copper.
Energite-tenantite mineralization has been found in the central part of the field, which is also typical for the upper parts of copper-porphyry mines.
 Energetic mineralization is represented by zones where the copper content is on average 0.3%, and molybdenum is in separate mineralized ranges, averaging 0.02-0.04%.
 In the continuation of the zones, at higher altitudes, gold with an average content of 0.7 g / t was found in the samples.
In the area, in the south-western part of the mineral field, developed ecoparc-zinc mineralization, represented by venous bodies.
  Their strength is 0.5-1.5 m on average, with an average content of 2.0% lead and 1.2% zinc.
The mentioned testifies to the vertical zoning.
 In addition, the horizontal zonation is fixed in the mineralogmatic system.
 On the outer part of the semicircular fault delineating the annular depression are polymetallic (Cu, Pb, Zn) փոքր small leads of zinc, in the placement of which the semicircular, northwestern, near-noon fractures played a major role.
By the way, in the cases when the polymetallic mineralization is located in a layer group, where the carbonate sediments predominate, they have a layered appearance, and when the enclosing structure is dominated by volcanic rocks, they form veins և venous zones.
The above allows us to conclude the following.
 There is a mining-magmatic system in the Lejan mineral junction, the main mineralization of which is copper-porphyry, which is accompanied by polymetallic և gold (?) Mineralization.
The distribution of the latter in space clearly fixes the horizontal-vertical zoning.
 Copper-porphyry ores will be mined at depths of 200-400 m above the modern surface of the earth.
  Taking into account the poverty of the ore, the way of open mining, the current market prices of metals, the depth and small size of the industrial mineralization we estimate, we can say that the copper-porphyry accumulation of Mets Dzor is not of industrial importance now.
  Of some industrial interest is the mineralization of gold, which has been developed here but is poorly studied, and which should be given more attention.
Literature 1. Tumanyan H., Movsesyan R., Grigoryan A., Structural-mineral zoning of Alaverdi anticlinorium, "YSU, Scientific Bulletin. Geology "Geography", 2012, № 2, pp. 10-18.
2. Movsisyan H., Standardization of Copper-Molybdenum-Porphyry Industrial Mineralization of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic of Armenia, "Collection of Articles of the JSU Jubilee Scientific Session Dedicated to the 90th Anniversary", vol. 2, Natural Sciences, Yerevan, 2010, pp. 77-84.
3. Movsisyan H., Peculiarities of Localization of Inner Mineralization in Shnogh-Koghb Mineral Joint, Abstract of the dissertation for the request of Candidate of Geological Sciences, Yerevan, YSU NAS RA, 2010, 24 pages.
of Canadian Mineral Deposit Types.
 Geological Survey of Canada, Geology of Canada, 1995, Barton M., Porphyry deposits.
  Characteristics and origin of hypogene features.
  Economic11. Sillitoe R., Porphyry copper systems.
 Economic Geology, v. 105, 2010, pp. 3-41.12. Sinclair W., Porphyry deposits, in Goodfellow WD, ed., Mineral Deposits of Canada.
  AProvinces, and Exploration Methods.
  Geological Association of Canada, Mineral Deposits Vahan Manukyan ABOUT EXPLORATION PROSPECTS OF MINERAL MAGNETIC SYSTEM OF KEYWORDS Keywords: mineral node, mineral-magmatic system, copper-porphyry mineralization, mineralization.
