SOME LANGUAGE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ARMENIAN TRANSLATION OF THE "EXIT" BOOK.
  Revelation was written by God's command, to be passed on from generation to generation, so that "all men might be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth," that "the man of God might be perfect, ready for all good works."
The Bible is a true testament to the relationship between God and mankind.
  Here God reveals himself, intervenes in people's lives, makes covenants with them.
  The sacred stories record the course of the people և people in the light of the salvation council of free choice of "life and death, good and evil".
  The Bible is the source of religion, theology, the church in general, and the believers in particular.
  This book is the masterpiece of centuries-old literature, cultural heritage of mankind, the book that has guided the course of world civilization and has the most influential influence.
"Bible", as a special name, is typical only in Armenian, borrowed from the New Testament, where the apostle Paul used it as an adjective. "Every book written in the spirit of God."
  The word Biblia used in other Christian churches is borrowed from Greek.
  Consisting of 75 different and complete books, written in different languages ​​(Hebrew, Greek, partly Aramaic), in different civilizations and eras, however, the Bible books are a solid and complete unity, harmoniously complementing each other.
The Holy Bible is divided into two inseparable parts: the Old and New Testaments.
The books that prophesy and prepare for the reception of Jesus Christ are called the Old Testament.
 And the books that are about the life of the promised Savior and his doctrine are part of the New Testament.
The division of the Holy Bible into two testaments originated in the early period of the spread of Christianity.
 The term "covenant", as it's "Old" և "New" adjectives are borrowed from the Bible, is a reflection of the covenants that God first made with the people of Israel through Moses on Mount Sinai, and then Christ with mankind. "This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many."
The Old Testament contains 39 books, the New Testament - 271.
1 See "Christian Armenia" encyclopedia, Yerevan, 2002, p. 104.
The first five books of the Bible: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers և B. Orinats, they are called the Pentateuch, they are known as Torah (law).
 Contained from creation to the entry of the Israelites into Canaan.
The first five books of the great prophet Moses, who led the Israelites out of Egypt, form the basis of the rest of the Old Testament, և the anchor of the history of the New Testament, as they reveal the divine plan of salvation.
Abraham's descendants were enslaved by Pharaoh after he had found refuge in Egypt (as God had told Abraham).
 The Lord, through Moses, redeems his people, makes a covenant on Mount Sinai, and declares his commandments and his laws.
 God commands him to build a tabernacle for himself so that he may be in it.
Archbishop Artak. According to Manukyan, "it has three main sections: the reasons and preparation for leaving Egypt, the way out of Egypt to the Sinai Desert, the rule of law."
Գ. According to Darbinyan, the book "Exodus" is the second in the Pentateuch, sometimes described as the "Gospel of the Old Testament".
  The point is that hunting, like the Gospel, proclaims the main "good news", that is, God brings his gracious participation in the lives of a group of people in order to liberate them and make them a holy people.
In order to penetrate the mind of this book, we must remember what the exit from Egypt meant for Israel.1) The departure from Egypt remains a remarkable event in the history of Israel.
  In fact, this is the turning point that led to the creation of Israel, with which you have connected your whole life, on which a number of its institutions, ceremonies and beliefs are based, with which its greatest national hopes are connected.
 We note that the departure from Egypt is the event that set in motion theological and historical thinking in Israel.
 This period was the part of Israel's youth that God cares about despite his first rebellions.
(2) The departure was not only the birth of Israel but also a happy time to meet God.
(3) The book of Exodus is a book of the people on the road, not a finished book.
  And since he is the witness of God's Savior intervention in the history of mankind, he nourishes the human soul with the hope of ultimate freedom.
The Bible, including the book of Exodus, stands out in the Armenian translation literature with its rich, rich vocabulary and a number of linguistic features.
  Examining the book of Exodus (chapters 5 to 5) reveals some linguistic features.
First, let's talk about the video system.
1 Artak Archbishop. Manoogian, The Bible, Tehran, 1995, p. 81.
2 Darbinyan G., Introduction to the Old Testament, S. Etchmiadzin, 2000, page 42.
Examining the spelling system of the book of Exodus, we notice that the words subject to spelling or irregular spelling are widely used here, for example, "And they came to their father Raguel" 1.
And they said. An Egyptian man rescued his brother from the children of Israel (p. 48).
For he ought to have smitten the Hebrew people with his brethren the children of Israel (48).
And his sister said to Pharaoh's daughter (47).
The girl went and called the mother the child (47).
The simplest passage is the most commonly used in this book, for example,… And he took them out of the land, and carried them into the land of good and abundance, to the land of milk and honey;
According to the sequence, the next most frequent passage in this book is the non-traditional passage, for example, "Behold, the nation of the sons of Israel is great in wrath" (44).
And the Egyptians overcame the children of Israel with violence (44).
The use of the perfect past tense of the past tense is predominant in the vocabulary of the book of Exodus, for example, And the children of Israel were raised and forgotten (43).
Joseph and all his brothers died (43).
There is a frequent use of the imperative tense (imperative imperative) tense, for example,… If it is a male, kill it, and if it is a female, bring it to life (45).
All the males that were born to the Hebrews were thrown into the river, and all the females were brought to life (p. 46).
In both examples, we note a significant feature: the live egg is formed from the present base, with a weak component.
This form of the imperative imperative is not common in Old Armenian (the imperative imperative was formed from the basis of the past perfect).
The use of the past tense in the opposite sense predominates, for example: And the daughter of Pharaoh went down to bathe in the river (47).
  And he saw (saw) the ark in the game (48).
We encounter the use of compound tenses (for example, the past participle), but not infrequently, for example, And he saw that the raspberry was burning with fire (50).
 The Bible has been translated into almost every language in the world.
  The translation of the Bible was a significant, historically and culturally significant event in the lives of peoples ժողով as a translation: a masterpiece of art. 1 Book of Exodus, Yerevan, 1997, p.
The literary language of many of them, and in some cases, conditioned the invention of letters պայման schooling.
The proclamation of Christianity as a state religion (301), the invention of passers-by for about a century և S. The Armenian translation of the book was the biggest and fateful turning point in Armenia.
 According to the 5th c. Historians Koryun, Movses Khorenatsi Ղ Ghazar Parpetsi: The Armenian translation had two definite points. The first one was made immediately after the invention of letters (405-406) in a few years.
French Armenologist La Cruz called the Armenian translation of the Bible "Queen of Translations".
 The Old Testament repeatedly prophesied to the Gentiles to see the "light", and the Savior specifically prophesied about it. "This gospel shall be preached in all the world" (Matt. 24).
14).
Nvard Alaverdyan LANGUAGE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ARMENIAN TRANSLATION OF THE "EXIT" BOOK Keywords: Bible, Armenian translation of the book "Exodus", excerpt, humility.
