RADIOACTIVITY IN CONTROL AND ITS EFFECT ON THE ENVIRONMENT The planet is considered a living organism, it is not dead, many tectonic, physical and chemical processes take place in its depths.
Since the formation of the planet, along with other elements, radioactive elements have been placed, which play a major role in many phenomena in the subsoil.
 Radioactivity is the phenomenon of spontaneous fission of an atom, during which a certain amount of energy is emitted. Tsalfa, beta or gamma rays.
  The phenomenon of harmful effects of radioactivity on humans has long been of interest, for which, after the discovery of the phenomenon of radioactivity, first of all, the negative impact on the environment and the human body was revealed.
 Thus, in 1895 V. X-ray assistant Gruben, as well as M. Curie, Frenchman A. Becquerel received severe injuries to his hand while examining the X-ray.
  That is why the world scientific community still in 1955. He set up a commission to protect himself from the negative effects of man-made radioactivity on the environment.
  At present, the negative impact of radioactivity on the human body is of great interest in the scientific world.
 Studies have shown that the human body is less affected by nuclear power plants (of which there are now more than 200 in the world) than by the use of coal in the household, by air transport, by living without ventilation, etc. [1].
 About 95% of the population of our planet (including Armenia) has a radiation dose of 03.-0.6 millisieverts per year.
This amount of radiation is currently considered normal for our planet, although in some places 5% of the population receives several tens of times more radiation than normal.
 For example, in a certain high-altitude area in the northern part of the Brazilian city of Passus di Calda, the population receives an average of 800 times more radiation (250 millisieverts) per year, for which the area is considered uninhabitable.
 However, at a distance of 600 km from it, in the coastal region, people receive 200 millisievert radioactivity, which is considered normal for them.
  In addition to the above-mentioned example, in the Guarapar district, where 1200 people live, the radiation dose in a year is 175 millisieverts.
 And in the Indian city of Thailand, where 70 thousand people live. Man, the radiation dose is 200 millisieverts, which is 400 times higher than normal.
  These areas are considered hot spots for our planet in terms of radioactivity.
  The hot zone is the area near the city of Ramsar in the Islamic Republic of Iran, where the radiation is 400 millisieverts.
The territory of the Republic of Armenia enters the normal zone in terms of radioactive radiation.
  France, Nigeria and Madagascar are among the most active countries in terms of radioactivity.
  It has been found that the radiation of the human body takes place mainly with the help of 222Rn emanation, which is 7.5 times heavier than air հանդես occurs in nature with the eggs of several isotopes.
 About 75% of the radiation in the human body occurs with the help of the 222 Rn isotope.
 The process of radioactive fission can not be influenced by external processes: pressure, temperature, density, etc.
  Radiation diseases are caused by the ionizing effect of radiation և may depend on the type, line, volume of radiation և etc.
Due to radioactivity, leukemia, hair loss, infertility, mutation, cancer, etc. occur.
Radiation diagnosis, according to the clinical horse, is acute-chronic.
Acute disease can be caused by the presence of radioactive particles in the atmosphere - neutrons, as well as X-rays.
  Studies have shown that human organs are exposed to different amounts of radiation from the same source.
 Human hands, feet, and head radiate less from the same source than the genitals.
  In addition, radioactive radiation has a negative effect on the destruction of tissues in the human body.
  Many building materials are endowed with radioactivity.
 The most common building materials - wood, brick - concrete - also contain a certain amount of radon.
  In contrast, the granite և pumice used by man is endowed with great radioactivity.
  In Sweden, for many years, clay was used as a building material, through which between 700 thousand. flat, after which it was found that the clay soil is quite radioactive due to its high absorption property of radioactive elements.
  Due to that, most of those buildings have been demolished, and at present clay is not used as a building material in the given country.
  In addition, in the US states of Idaho, Florida, as well as in Canada, the composition of the concrete used calcium calcium silicate, which is also rich in radioactivity.
Construction materials from Canada, China and the Netherlands are endowed with the minimum radioactivity, and the building materials of the USA, France and Madagascar are endowed with maximum radioactivity.
 Because the 222Rn is 7.5 times heavier than air, it accumulates in basements և on the lower floors, so in cold weather, the occupants of the lower floors must ventilate their apartment several times a day to reduce the intensity of the radon.
Because radioactive elements are distributed on our planet in different sizes, the inhabitants of different countries are exposed to different amounts of radiation.
  To avoid radiation, the radioactivity of buildings, structures և separate areas should be regularly examined.
Particular attention should be paid to radioactive solid, liquid և gas waste storage և neutralization.
  In recent years, studies have been conducted in Kanaker, Nork, Arabkir, Victory Park, Small Center, Zeytun, as well as in the area of ​​Mkhitar Heratsi, Charents and Abovyan streets in order to avoid radioactivity in Yerevan.
  It turned out that the intensity of radon in the center of Yerevan was somewhat higher than normal.
  Usually the intensity of radiation in different corners of the apartment is different, therefore the radioactivity in the bathroom is 3 times more than in the kitchen.
 Studies in Canada have shown that during the first 7 minutes when the water tap is turned on, the amount of Rn rises after 0.5 hours, the amount of new Rn in the bath returns to normal.
  Water used by humans is also endowed with a certain amount of radioactivity.
  Radioactivity in water was first discovered in 1896. in the Caucasian mineral waters.
  U, Th, Rn waters are separated in nature.
 The radioactivity of water occurs when that water floods the U, Th և other radioactive deposits.
  Water is considered to be drinkable if the content of U in it is 5 * 10-5 g per 1 liter, and radon is less than 50 eman.
Conclusion.
  The factual materials on radioactivity presented by us allow us to make the following conclusions: 1. There is a certain amount of radioactivity on our planet, which is everywhere but not evenly distributed.
2. The use of radioactive elements by humans has both positive and negative effects, which should be paid the most attention every day.
3. There is no non-radioactive hydrosphere on our planet, the lithosphere, but they all contain a certain amount of radioactive elements.
4. Food used by humans և Water also contains radioactive elements, so their content should be under the daily attention of the service staff of the environmental protection center of the country.
5. To avoid 222Rn emanation, residential buildings ությունները should be ventilated during the day to reduce the radon intensity several times during the day.
6. As the study depths of radioactive element study methods do not exceed 0.5, and Armenia is considered to be a mountainous country with severely cut terrain, where intensive wind processes occur, as a result of which radioactive deposits at shallow depths can reach the earth's surface. radioactive observations should be made.
7. The most intense of the radioactive rays, the gamma ray, can cause little damage if it is covered with hard rock at a depth of more than 0.5 m above the earth's surface.
  As Armenia is in an active geosynclinal zone, the gamma ray can reach the surface of the earth due to the wind.
LiteratureMartin Sahakyan RADIOACTIVITY IN CONSULTATION AND ITS IMPACT ON THE ENVIRONMENT Keywords: radioactivity, millisievert, radiation, radon.
