RESEARCH OF SOLVATION OF IONS IN METHOD OF ELECTRICAL CONDUCTION IN AQUATIVE SOLUTIONS OF DIMETHYL SULFOXIDE Introduction.
  Ion-solvent interactions provide the information needed to study the transport properties of electrolyte solutions.
 The method of electrical conductivity, which is used not only for chemical but also for the study of biological reactions, has been widely used to elucidate these properties.
 Being a classical method, it continues to be irreplaceable for studying the structure of solutions.
The structure of an aqueous solution is affected by the presence of organic additives (eg dioxane, dimethylsulfoxide, acetonitrile).
  They reduce the dielectric permeability of an aqueous solution, which affects the solvation of ions in the solution, making ion pairs possible.
 By changing the structure of the aqueous solution with the presence of an organic additive, it is possible to make the processes taking place in them manageable [1, 3].
The structural feature of DMSO aqueous solutions is that in case of low concentrations of DMSO, stabilization of the water structure is observed.
  In case of high concentrations of DMSO, the water associative structure is destroyed, a new type of DMSO-water associations are formed.
The structure of the solution is 1 DMSO.
2 water, 1 DMSO.
Formation of 3 water compounds [2, 5].
  It is possible to form other types of associations.
  By changing the structure of the solution in such a way, the processes taking place in them can be managed [4, 6].
In this work, we present the study of ion solvation by the method of electrical conductivity in aqueous solutions of an organic additive, dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO).
Materials used և methods.
  DMSO (Sigma company,> 99.5%, USA), potassium salts KCl, KBr, KI և KNO3 (REAHIM company, "BCM" brand) were used in the studies.
  The initial concentration of the salt solutions was 0.1 M, the solutions were prepared with double-saturated water.
Water-salt տր The electrical conductivity of DMSO-water-salt systems was measured using a Jenway 4330 (England) electrical conductivity meter.
Double distilled water was used to prepare the solutions.
  The measurement error is ≈ 2%.
  The specific conductivity of salt solutions (κ) for all temperatures was measured by the device.
  We have calculated the molar electrical conductivity based on the specific electrical conductivity values ​​according to the equation below.
  Electrical conductivity in case of strong electrolytes (
) is determined according to Kolraush's law. where is the electrical conductivity in the case of infinite dilution, C is the salt concentration, and B is a constant value that depends on the nature of the electrolyte solvent as well as the temperature.
 In infinitely dilute solutions, when the ion interactions are attenuated, the և molar electromagnetic conduction tends to the limit value.
  Thus, the zero concentration is determined.
 The sensitivity of the device is 5.10-9 C.
 from the graph with coordinates, directly extrapolating to the presentation of the results և discussion.
  We have studied the patterns of electrical conductivity of both aqueous and DMSO-containing solutions of equalium salts (KCl, KBr, KI, KNO3).
  Figure 1 shows the change in the molar conductivity of KBr water-DMSO solutions depending on the salt concentration at 25 oC.
Figure 1. Molecular electrical conductivity of KBr water-DMSO solutions depending on the salt concentration at 25oC.1. C (DMSO) = 0.59 M, 2. C (DMSO) = 1.57 M, 3. C (DMSO) = 2.49 As we can see from Figure 1, the molar conductivity of aqueous solutions of KBr, depending on the salt concentration, is linear. .
The limit conductivity of an electrolyte solution represents the sum of the motions of individual ions in the event of infinite dilution.
 Given the fact that all are solutions of potassium salts, it means that the differences in electrical conductivity are due to the anion.
1000C0CB000C00C0.10.20.30.40.50.620406080100120140ê.Ù-1C1 / 2 (KBr), (ÙáÉ / K) 1/2123 To find out how the limit conductivity of saline solutions changes in the presence of DMSO, we measured the specific conductivity of potassium salts (KCl, KBr, KI, KNO3) in both aqueous and DMSO-containing solutions. , then graphically, based on Kolraush's law of "square root", we decided.
  The dependence of the limit conductivity of potassium salt solutions on the concentration of DMSO is given in Fig. In 2.
Figure 2. Dependence of limit conductivity of potassium salts on DMSO concentration. t = 25 oC As we can see, as the concentration of DMSO increases, all the salts decrease, which changes according to the following order:
In the presence of DMSO, the limit electrical conductivity of aqueous solutions of potassium salts decreases.
 Moreover, when increasing the DMSO, that value decreases sharply, after which the further increase of the DMSO leads to a small change.
  The dependence of the electrical conductivity of solutions on the concentration of DMSO has the same arrangement as in aqueous solutions.
  The reduction in limiting electrical conductivity is the result of the fact that with the increase of DMSO, the structure of the ion solvate membrane changes with the inclusion of DMSO molecules.
  As the concentration of DMSO increases, the size of the solvate membrane increases.
  DMSO is in the electrochemical range ahead of water, so DMSO molecules push water molecules out of the hydrated membrane of ions, taking their place.
Enlargement of the solvate membrane փոխարին Replacement with heavier molecules has a negative effect on ion mobility.
  This is why increasing the concentration of DMSO in this concentration range leads to a decrease in ion mobility.
Thus, from the obtained results, we can assume that in the 0-1.15M concentration range of DMSO, the solvate membrane structural change of ions takes place with the introduction of DMSO molecules.
00.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55060708090100110120130140150C (¸Øêú), ÙáÉ.É-1ê.ëÙ2.ÙáÉ-1KNO3KClKIKBroKBrKJKClKNO3o Literature 3. Arakawa T., Ejima D., Kita Y., Tsumoto K., Small molecule pharmacological chaperones.
Hasmik Shilajyan, Merri Mkrtchyan RESEARCH ON SOLVATATION OF IONS IN DIMETHYSULFOXIDE SOLUTIONS ELECTRICAL CONDUCTIVITY: METHODOLOGICS
