SYNTHESIS AND SITUATION OF FOURTH AMONIUM SALTS AND THEIR SETTING ON INORGANIC CARRIERS
The reaction was found in N. By Menshutkin in 1890 [1, 3].
The reaction rate depends on nitrogen և alkyl. (alkenyl, alkynyl) from the nature of halogen hydrocarbon substituents in halogen.
 The rate of the reaction decreases with increasing volume of the substituents: CH3> C2H5> high molecular weight saturated hydrocarbons> iso-C3H7 ոնի ammonium salt in the following order: I> Br> Cl.
  The reaction rate increases when the alkyl substituent is replaced by alkenyl և alkynyl groups.
Tertiary butyl halides are difficult to form quaternary ammonium.
 Aromatic hydrogen halides, such as dinitrochlorobenzene, 2,4- (NO2) 2C6H3Hal, are capable of such bonding from aromatic halides.
Menshutkin's reaction with alkyl halides is carried out by the classical mechanism of nucleophilic deposition SN2.
  Load solvents increase the speed of the process.
  Such solvents have many advantages with disadvantages: fire hazard or toxicity.
 This reaction was performed in a water-emulsion medium with intensive mixing to exclude the use of bulk solvents.
We have previously found [2] that the synthesis of quaternary ammonium salts is accelerated by the addition of 10% of the reaction medium to a water-emulsion medium.
 Creating a water-emulsion medium makes the nucleophilic substitution reaction process easier.
  Ammonium salt introduced into the reaction medium becomes responsible for the transfer of a well-dissolved tertiary amine to the organic part, where the alkyl halide is predominantly present.
 This increases the rate of the alkyl halide substitution reaction.
 The quaternary ammonium salt obtained as a result of the reaction continues to play the role of emulsifier.
 In general, the process is carried out by a mechanism corresponding to interphase catalysis, where the added dry ammonium salt NR1R2R3 + R4XNR1R2R3R4X acts as an interphase catalyst.
  This paper investigates the synthesis of ammonium salts based on dimethylbenzyl-, dimethyldodecyl- և trimethylaminium.
  The alkylation of these amines was carried out with an alkyl halide with a long hydrocarbon chain, dodecyl bromide, methyl chloride and bromide, resulting in the following NSAIDs: 1. Benzyltrimethylammonium bromide, 2. benzyltrimethylammonium chloride, 3. dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide, 4. didodicyldimethylammonium bromide.
Synthesized quaternary ammonium agherCHAA in karutsvatskayinbanadzeveElk,% / MrT hectoliters, ˚С LutseliutyuneJur, beverayinorganakanlutsichnerJur, beverayinorganakanlutsichnerJur, beverayinorganakanlutsichnerJur, beverayinorganakanlutsichnerAghyusak 1.Artakinteske, kayunutyuneSpitakbyureghner, hygroscopic yenSpitakbyureghner, hygroscopic yenSpitakbyureghner, hygroscopic powder yenSpitakbyureghayin usually kayunBnakan tseolitnere, which is klinoptilolite, [4] Due to their unique properties - adsorption, catalytic, etc., have found wide application - they are considered mainly cheap raw materials compared to other series of sorbents.
Quaternaries activated with quaternary ammonium salts are used both in alkylation reactions and for environmental purposes to absorb petroleum oils from aqueous solutions.
Experimental part.
 The synthesis of quaternary ammonium salts was carried out in a two-phase system of interphase catalysis, where the corresponding CAA was used as an emulsifier, as mentioned above.
 The reaction was carried out in a three-way flask, which is equipped with a mixer, a refrigerator and a dripping funnel.
  First, tertiary amine (0.1 mol) և 10% (0.01 mol) of the intended salt is added to the flask.
 The alkyl halide is then added at room temperature.
 The reaction mixture is heated to 60 ° C until the possible completion of the process, which usually takes 10-20 hours.
  The output of the reaction is 75% (more (Table 1).
It has been experimentally confirmed that the optimal number of revolutions of a mechanical mixer is 700-800 rpm.
 The amount of interacting alkyl halide is determined by the titration of chlorine (bromine) anion in a sample taken from one reaction medium every hour.
Me3NCH2C6H5BrMe3NCH2C6H5ClBrMe3NC12H25BrMe2N (C12H25) 2 Deposition of quaternary ammonium salts on zeolite.
  100 g of pre-processed zeolite (clinoptilolite from Noyemberyan region) is poured into the above-mentioned well flask, and 31 g (0.1 mol) of dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide dissolved in 50 ml of methanol is added to it under mixing conditions.
  The reagent mixture was mixed at room temperature for 6 hours, then left for 48 hours.
  The reaction mixture was later distilled with a water pump.
 The methanol from the reaction mixture was collected in a freezing coil in Dewar.
  Weighing in a triple flask, 132 g of solid residue was found.
The latter was placed in a desiccator containing MgSO4 and left for a week.
 The flask was weighed again.
 131.2 g of substance was found in the flask.
The mixture of zeolite obtained with CHA is heated for 2 hours at 200 ° C, after which the amount of desorbed salt is determined by titration of bromine anion, as well as by the method of spectroscopy.
Conclusion.
  Clinoptilolite of Noyemberyan region was used.
Dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide was found to adsorb well on the surface of zeolite.
There is no accumulation of material in the distillery collection, which again speaks of the CHA sitting on the zeolite, being well connected with the zeolite.
Literature Artashes Aristakesyan, Aramayis Yeritsyan, Gagik Torosyan SYNTHESIS OF THE FOURTH AMMONIUM SALTS AND THEIR SETTINGS
