THE POLITICAL WRINKLES OF GRIGORY II'S WITNESSES 'TRIBUTE The first major period of emigration of the Armenian people, which was initiated by the Armenians of Vaspurakan in the 1020s, brought about noticeable changes in the social environment and its organization.
  The transformations caused by emigration were so significant, and the number of people leaving the homeland was so large that K. Kahen did not hesitate to record. "The most powerful emigrants are Armenians and Turks" 1.
 Under the new situation, the political units were not able to unite the displaced Armenians for a short time, so the Armenian Church soon became involved in ensuring national unity.
  At the same time, the process of adapting the Catholicosate to the changes of public life was in progress.
  As a result of all this, the problem of assessing the new realities is complicated by the seemingly contradictory image of Catholicos Gregory II.
  In foreign language (mostly French) studies2, however, many questions were answered, the far-reaching political goals of the Armenian patriarch were revealed, and the view of attributing him to the image of a fanatical hermit was fundamentally denied.
At the same time, it should be noted that a number of issues, such as the circumstances of Gregory II's accession to the throne, were not fully covered in these studies, probably due to program or chronological frameworks, so it is necessary to refer to the impressive activity of the founder of the Pahlavunyats Catholicos House.
The death of Khachik II Anetsi in 1060 left the Armenian patriarchal seat vacant.
The ban on the election of a new Catholicos by the Byzantine Empire left the Armenian people without a church leader for 5 years and 4 years.
 Finally, in 1065, King Gagik Abasyan of Kars obtained permission to elect a new Armenian patriarch by ceding his kingdom to Byzantium.
 This logic catholicos Gregory II of Martyrophile et ses pérégrinations, «Բազմավէպ», 1974, v. 3-4, pp. 306-325.
  Same, L'Egypte vue par des Armeniens, Paris, 1988, pp. 7-24.
3 It is customary for Peter I to return to the throne of Getadardz by 1058, and for Khachik II Anetsun by 1065.
 See Ormanyan M., Azgapatum, h. A, Etchmiadzin, 2001, columns 1458-1460, 1467, 1480.
The found sources, however, give grounds for making a new date.
  For more on these issues, see "Memoirs of Armenian Manuscripts", 5th-12th centuries, work by A. Matosyan, Yerevan, 1988, p. 102, note. 1.
 Matosyan K., Catholicos Ani, the capital of Ani, "PBS", 2008 3, page 25.
4 The sources do not show unequivocality in the issue of the years of vacancy of the Armenian Catholicosate.
  We think the testimonies of Vardan Vardapet և Nerses Lambronatsi are more probable. See Vardan Vardapet, The Collection of History, Venice, 1862, p. 102.
 Nerses Lambronatsi, Gavazanagirq, S. Matenadaran of Lazarus, hand. 894, pp. 53a-55a.
Full judgment not only does not contradict the sources, but is proved in two of them.
 Thus, Nerses Shnorhali in his "Epic" assures that Gagik "exchanged his kingdom for this issue (patriarchal election privilege - S. B.)" 1.
 On the other hand, the anonymous biography of Nerses Shnorhali, the author of the story "The History of St. Nerses Shnorhali", gives a similar testimony. "In exchange for this request from Zoroastrianism in the hands of the Horomots, Zamur was ordered to sit down and give his seat to the Armenian Patriarchate."
  H. Berberyan does not doubt the credibility of the mentioned sources. "His gifted biography is almost modern, they could have been better informed than the others in any case."
Ժ. According to Dedeyan's impressive description, with the handover of the Kingdom of Kars "the price of the restoration of the Armenian Catholicosate was paid" 4.
Why did the choice of the Armenian political environment, which gained the right to have a new Catholicos, stop at the candidacy of Vahram Pahlavuni?
 Մ. Ormanyan considers the necessity of choosing a figure whose "pro-Greek feelings should not be left in the lurch" an obligatory condition, according to that, he explains the event only from that starting point5.
  In reality, however, the patriarchal election must have been influenced by Sahak Partitsilq.
 The fact that the vision was not forgotten during the period in question is proved with the help of the original sources.
  First of all, the Catholicos himself in his memoir7 connects his choice with Sahak Part-Tsitesilk, besides, he also mentions the vision of Matteos Urhayetsi8.
  It is clear that the Armenian social environment should have got acquainted with it.
 According to that visionary prophecy in Ghazar Parpetsi's "Armenian History", "the priesthood of the tribe deserves a high priest Grigor" 9.
  Only centuries later, according to the vision of "near the filthy desert", "a new seat of the patriarchate in the radius of St. Gregory."
 Taking into account the tradition of the origin of the Pahlavunis in the Armenian medieval historiography, the vision can be considered fulfilled.
  It is interesting that the Catholicosate remained in the hands of the immediate descendants of the Enlightener (301-439) and the Pahlavunis (1065-1203) for 138 years11.
 In both cases, 7 patriarchs ascended the throne.
  Thus, the view of Sahak Part's vision on the impact on the Catholicos election can be considered acceptable.
Matteos Urhayetsi informs that before the enthronement Vahram got married, but not long after, he left his wife and left for a secular life.
2 Story of St. Nerses Shnorhalo Vartuzn, "Soperk Haykakanq", vol. 14, Venice, 1854, page 17.
3 Berberian H., The Exaltation of the Armenian Catholicosate in the Second Half of the 11th Century, "Handesamsoreay", 1967 1-12, pp. 342.
4 Dédéyan G., Les Arméniens sur la frontière sud-orientale de Byzance, fin IXe-fin XIe siècles, In.
  Travaux de la5 Ormanyan M., p. 1490.
6 Ghazar Parpetsi, History of Armenia, exam. original: G. Ter-Mkrtchyan և St. Malkhasyants, Yerevan, 1982, pp. 66-82.
7 "Memoirs of Armenian Manuscripts", 5th-12th centuries, p. 109.
8 Matteos Urhayetsi, Chronology, Old Armenian original by M. Melik-Adamyan և N. Ter-Mikayelyan, Yerevan, 1991, p. 246.
9 Lazar Parpetsi, page 76.
10 Ibid., P.
11 Alishan J., In his gifted case, Venice, 1873, p. 14.
քից 1.
  He was considered to have been ordained a priest, renamed Gregory, probably dragged to the Holy Mountains of Amanos for exile2.
  However, we have decisive evidence in one of the memoirs. "Speech of the Armenian Catholicos Grigoris, first pronounced Vahram, when he was ordained Catholicos he was called Grigoris, in the name of his ancestor St. Gregory the Illuminator" 3.
  In fact, Vahram was named during the ordination of the Catholicos, which was the first in his life.
  If he had been ordained before that, he would have been named at that time, not when he was enthroned.
 It turns out that Vahram-Grigor left worldly life when ascending the Catholicos's throne, for that very reason.
 He was not a clergyman at all before he was elected patriarch.
  What is the most remarkable?
  There was already a precedent in Armenian history. 855 Zakaria Dzagetsi, a layman, was elected Catholicos, and on the same day he was awarded all the church ranks.
  In the second similar case, a tradition is established in the Armenian church life, when the solution of vital problems makes it necessary to ignore the church rules - the ordination of a desirable person, even a secular Catholicos.
 And the choice of the name Grigor should have symbolized the "renovation" of the Catholicosate Institute by the example of the Enlightener and the ancestral connection of the new Armenian patriarch with him.
It is due to such interesting circumstances that Vahram-Grigor Pahlavuni ascended the Armenian Catholicosate.
  Both his enthronement and the period of ecclesiastical leadership were marked by a number of realities that resulted in the process of reorganization of the Armenian Church.
 Thus, the church assembly temporarily loses its function of a body ratifying the patriarchal election, handing it over to the "holy spirit."
It is not accidental that on the occasion of the election of Grigor Vkayaser M. Ormanyan writes: "It is not an electoral meeting convened by the bishops" 4.
  "Zsa (Gregory Bean - S.B.) revealed the Holy Spirit to sit on the throne of the Holy Enlightener," the historian reports 5.
 Barsegh I becomes Catholicos "by the order of the Spirit" 6.
 Thus, due to political circumstances, the church assembly is temporarily deprived of the right to hold a Catholicos election, which, according to Armenian historiography, is handed over to the "holy soul".
  In fact, the return is made in the order of the hereditary power of the Catholicos. The patriarchal seat passes to the members of the Pahlavunyats House, who appoint their successors, thus passing on the "grace of the Holy Spirit" to them.
  The legacy of the Armenian Catholicosate already has two precedents.
 The death of Sahak Part put an end to the hereditary Catholicosate of the Enlightenment dynasty.
  They were relatives in the 10th-11th centuries. The 5 patriarchs who followed each other with breaks7, who unite in "Petrosyanta" 8.
 Thus, the Pahlavunis were the third dynasty in the position of patriarch.
1 Matthew Urhayetsi, page 102.
2 See Bogharian N., Armenian Writers, 5th-17th Centuries, Jerusalem, 1971, p. 194.
 Ormanyan M., sy. 1491-1492.
3 "Memoirs of Armenian Manuscripts", 5th-12th centuries, p. 135.
4 Ormanyan M., sy. 1489.
5 Matthew Urhayetsi, p. 168.
6 Ibid., P. 360.
7 Anania A. Mokatsi, Khachik A. Arsharuni, Sargis A. Sants, Petros A. Getadardz, Khachik B. Anetsi.
8 For the name of the Catholicos dynasty, see Dédéyan G., Les Arméniens…, pp. 230-232.
Another manifestation of the reorganization of the Armenian Church was the change of the Catholicos' title.
  Already on the occasion of the enthronement of Gregory III, Matteos Urhayetsi uses the phrase "Catholicos of all Armenians" instead of "Catholicos of the Great Armenians".
  1160-1170 In the documents of the Armenian-Byzantine negotiations we find episodes of the use of a new title2.
  The reason for the observed change is quite logical. The geographical perception of the Armenian Catholicosate ("Hayots Metsats") is gradually being replaced by an ethnic one3.
  From now on, the Armenian Catholicos is the caring leader not only of Greater Armenia, but of all the scattered Armenians.
  With this realization in the 1160s. Nerses Shnorhali to define the limits of the Armenian Catholicos' careful authority, extending it to all Christians of Armenian descent, "who live in their own world, who live in Armenia, who slide to the west, who live in the Mediterranean," who live in the Mediterranean.
 The new title of the leader of the Armenian Church is considered by foreign sources to be equivalent to the title of "caliph" Muslim5.
It is natural that these significant changes in the church system, of course, should have left their mark on the activities of the Catholicos.
  From this point of view, it is necessary to study the long and arduous travels undertaken by Gregory II, which were the result of political motives rather than religious zeal or satisfaction of spiritual needs.
  Matteos Urhayetsi, the historian who provides the most information about the Catholicos, explains these journeys with the intention of touring "with the love of loneliness" 6, "longing to live in heads" 7, "the question of the first saint in the desert".
This interpretation has been included in a number of studies.
 Gregory II's travels were explained by his "desire to lead a preferred hermit life, to visit Christian centers" 9 (N. Pogharyan), 10 aspirations of "religious piety" (M. Ormanyan), "asceticism" 11 (M. Shiryan).
 No matter how original the reports of Matteos Urhayetsi may be for us, they should be treated with some caution, in particular, there is a controversy as to why the Catholicos, who leaves "his own flock" in time and thinks only of saving himself, is described by the same historian as " the pillar of the Armenian faith "," the wall of the holy church "12.
  The problem is that Matthew Urhayetsi probably intends to hide the real reason for the trips.
 The fact that he should have been aware of Gregory II, at least the details of his execution in Egypt, is almost unambiguous. After all, the Fatimyans' Armenian 1 Matteos Urhayetsi, page 360.
2 Bozoyan A., The new perception of the Armenian Catholicos after the fall of the Bagratuni kingdom, "Christian East և Armenia", Yerevan, 2000, pp. 80-85.
3 In the same place.
4 Nerses Shnorhali, General paper, work: E. Baghdasaryan, Yerevan, 1995, p. 53.
5 Bozoyan A., The new perception of the Armenian Catholicos…, pp. 83-84.
6 Matthew Urhayetsi, p. 204.
7 Ibid., P.
8 Ibid., P. 228.
9 Bogharian N., p. 194.
10 Ormanyan M., sy. 1498.
12 Matthew Urhayetsi, p. 324.
Badr al-Jamali, the convert to Islam, had taken many Armenian craftsmen from Edesia to build the second line of the Cairo walls, and had handed over control of the entire construction to Hovhan Kronavor, again from Edesia.
  However, the historian mentions Badr only once, on the occasion of defeating the Seljuk general Akhsis and establishing peace throughout Egypt, and without a name, only by title - Amir-Ghoshdz (Amir-al-Juyush - leader of the troops).
 Matteos Urhayetsi, who has many details, is almost silent about Badr's impressive activity. It is clear that the church historian should have at least shown intolerance towards the converted Armenian.
Matteos Urhayetsi is silent about Grigor II, K. Constantinople վերաբերյալ About the real goals of the trips to Rome, not wanting to tell about the joint activity of the Catholicos restoring the Armenian Catholicosate and re-establishing the Enlightenment dynasty on it.
 Thus, the historian aims, on the one hand, to idealize Gregory II by attributing to him special features of Gregory the Illuminator, and, on the other hand, to conceal the political basis of his travels.
  It is noteworthy that the anonymous biography of Nerses Shnorhali does not join Grigor II in the army of those who attribute only the image of a pilgrim. "He always went to them (to the Christian Armenians - S. B.) and instructed everyone to follow my commandments" 1.
 Thus, with the aim of visiting the displaced Armenians and responding to the created political situation, the Armenian Catholicos undertakes local trips to K. The data provided by the sources on the date of Constantinople, Rome, Egypt, Jerusalem… Their sequence են are very diverse նակ inconsistent 2.
  The fact that Grigor Vkayaser could visit the same place several times does not leave the researcher with the right to distrust the source, thus depriving him of the opportunity to present a systematic picture of the sequence of directions.
  For example, according to Vardan Vardapet, one year after his enthronement, the Catholicos left for K. Polis 3, while other sources neither confirm nor deny this information, so the most sensible approach is to rely on outside data աբանական logical reasoning.
  Guided in this way, J. Dedeyan considers the beginning of Grigor Vkayaser's travels to be 1074.4.
  A year before that, Gregory II had authorized the Catholicosate of Sargis Honetsi, sending him "the veil, the sanctuary, the sacred sign of Lord Peter."
  This event J. Dedeyan considers 1074 an "obvious justification". in favor of 6. By handing over the patriarchate of the 7 Armenians of the territories under Pilartos Varajnuni to Sargis, Grigor could easily leave those regions and start his travels.
 This opinion is highly probable, especially since it corresponds to the History of St. Nerses the Gifted, by Matthew Urhayetsi, pp. 19-20.
3 Vardan Vardapet, page 102.
5 Matthew Urhayetsi, p. 226.
7 For a reference to Pilartos, see ibid., P.
ություններին According to the testimonies of the historian Smbat 1.
 Thus, probably in 1074. The Armenian patriarch embarks on long journeys, the political folds of which we will return to below.
The direction of Grigor Vkayaser K. Constantinople is presented in bright colors by the biography of Nerses Shnorhali.
 Emperor Michael E. Doukas (1072-1078) The Patriarch of Constantinople Cosmas (1075-1081) "received him with great honor" 2.
Gregory, who was "well versed in the Greek language and schooling," was compelled to participate in theological discussions, after which "the king was lovingly bound to him in a wise assembly."
 Shortly afterwards, the Armenian Catholicos asked for permission to stay in the Byzantine capital and use its rich libraries.
  The emperor not only fully complied with Gregory's request, but also "arranged for all my food, rochiks yarkunust."
 Gathering many Armenian translators and scholars around him, Grigor Vkayaser carries out an impressive translation activity.
  Moreover, the number and significance of the translated manuscripts were so great that the Armenian pastor, fearing that the Greeks might forbid them to be taken out of the capital, secretly boarded his companions loaded with translations, joining them later3.
  All this reminds Nerses Shnorhali of the 5th century. translation movement. "The second Mesrop came to us // Translated by Zgirsbazum" 4.
It is more interesting to discover the political folds of this direction.
After the battle of Manazkert, Michael Dukas applied to the Pope for military assistance.
 In response, Gregory V (1073-1085) intended to organize an invasion against the Seljuks, even to personally lead it5.
  In the conditions of active negotiations between the Emperor and the Pope, Grigor Vkayaser, being included in the embassy of Michael I6, leaves for Rome.
  Becoming an emperor ambassador should seem so surprising if we consider that the expansion of power of Pilartos Varajnuni and the Seljuk threat forced the empire, leaving aside theological disputes, to view the Armenian Catholicos as a purely political figure.
  In this regard, it is appropriate to mention that the Armenian ecclesiastical historian presents the emperor as "a kind, God-loving man, adorned with all virtues, with a brilliant Orthodox faith."
 There was a strong circumstance that St. Pilartos, taking advantage of the defeat of Byzantium at the Battle of Manazkert, refused to recognize the power of Emperor Michael Dukas.
  On the other hand, he occupied the Pahlavuni territories in the Mesopotamian army, killed Tornik Musheghyan-Mamikonyan, the husband of Grigor II's sister, Tel 1 Matteos Urhayetsi, p. 228.
  Smbat Sparapet, Yearbook, Venice, 1956, page 82.
  The two begin their journeys in 1074.
2 History of St. Nerses the Gifted, page 22.
3 Ibid., Pp. 22-23.
 See also Ter-Petrosyan L., Ancient Armenian translated literature, Yerevan, 1984, pp. 30-31.
4 Nerses Shnorhali, Bank measure, page 593.
5 Заборов М., Крестовые походы, Москва, 1956, с. 37-38. Ibid., Papacy and the Crusades, Moscow, 1960, pp. 27-30.
7 Matthew Urhayetsi, p. 228.
Bashir was taken from Vahram Pahlavuni… Therefore, it is natural that in the fight against Pilartos the emperor could completely rely on the Pahlavuni1.
The travels of Gregory the Witness to Rome were evaluated differently.
 Մ. Ormanyan and F. Turnibiz considered it impossible2, while J. Alishan, M. Chamchyan, L. Kogyan, P. Ananyan, J. Dedeyan expressed the opposite opinion3, considering the testimony of Kirakos Gandzaketsi credible. "And when the holy patriarch went to Rome, he was greatly honored by the French nation."
  This small detail is the only one in Armenian historiography about the direction of Rome. Matteos Urhayetsi and Smbat Sparapet5 only mention it by name.
 Already in the 10-11th centuries. Armenians had a rich tradition of pilgrimages to the west (including Rome) 6.
  It is interesting to note that still in the 8th century. An Armenian pilgrim grandfather asked for the relic of St. Peter և Received the finger of the apostle7.
 In this context, this regular episode of Gregory the Witness's travels, apart from the obvious political nuance, can be attributed to the nature of the pilgrimage.
The Byzantine emperor's embassy, ​​no matter how successful the negotiations with the papal circles, was doomed to delay the military aid of the West for about 2 decades.
 Pope Gregory I տիր Between Henry IV (1056-1106), ruler of the Holy Roman Empire և 1075 The sharp conflict that started did not leave any opportunity to organize an anti-Seljuk invasion.
Nevertheless, the connection between the Armenian Catholicos and the Pope was not interrupted by this.
It has reached us of Gregory E. in 1080. Letter No. 8 dated June 6, 1918, addressed to Archbishop Gregory of Sinnada, identified with Gregory the Witness, referring to the Sinnada-Tsamndav correspondence.
  1079 The delegate of the Armenian Catholicos, Hovhannes, met with the pope, asking him to punish an Armenian heretic named Makar, who, fleeing Armenia, was discrediting the Armenian Church in Rome.
  Responding to the request of the Armenian delegate, the pope sent a letter to the Armenian patriarch through him, in which several issues of a purely ritual nature were raised.
  It is noteworthy that the letter does not require an ad limina visit from Gregory the Witness 10, which shows that it has already been done.
 Relations with the West were maintained later.
  This is evidenced by the presence of Gregory the Witness during the conquest of Jerusalem by the Crusaders (July 1099) 2 Ormanyan M., s. 1498.
 Tournebize F., Political and Religious History of Armenia, Paris, 1910, p. 165.3 Chamchiants M., History of Armenia, vol. 2, Yerevan, 1984, page 1000.
  Alishan J., p. 34.
  Kogian L., The Armenian Church, Beirut, 1961, pp. 368-371.
  Ananian P., Grigoris Vkayaser և Armenian-Roman relations, "Bazmavep", 1992, pp. 9-13.
 Dédéyan G., Les Arméniens p, pp. 252-261.4 Kirakos Gandzaketsi, History of Armenia, Yerevan, 1961, p. 96.
5 Matthew Urhayetsi, p. 228.
 Smbat Sparapet, page 82.
6 Dedeyan J., Armenian monks and pilgrims in Western Europe at the end of the 10th century - beginning of the 11th century, "PBH", 1984. 3, pp. 21-36.
8 For the Armenian translation of the letter, see Ananian P., pp. 21-24.
9 Ibid., Pp. 13-14.
10 Visite ad limina apostolarum was required of other churches affiliated with the Catholic Church, as well as of all Catholic clergy, whose responsibilities included a five-year pilgrimage to Paul, the relics of the apostles Peter, and a meeting with the pope as Peter's successor.
in you 1.
  Here is K. Due to the active relations with the imperial and patriarchal circles of Constantinople պ the papal circles of Rome, the Armenian patriarch was assigned 2 roles of "forerunner of the union movement".
The next episode of the Armenian Catholicos's travels is connected with Egypt.
 Of particular interest in this regard is the testimony of Kirakos Gandzaketsi, according to whom, after the shipwreck, Catholicos Gregory prayed that heavy rains fall all over Egypt, which caused terror among the population, because before that it was only during the visit of the prophet Moses to Jesus Christ. .
 Due to that, the Armenian patriarch "received a lot of glory and greatness from the king of Egypt" 4.
  Thus, a beautiful tradition has been woven in Armenian historiography to explain the warm reception of the Armenian patriarch in a Muslim country.
In fact, the picture is different.
 969 In Egypt, power passed to the Fatimids, who established their dominance in North Africa, in certain parts of Syria.
  However, the weakening of the central government during the caliphate of Al-Mustansir (1036-1094) led to sharp clashes between different ethnic groups, which were accompanied by a drought and famine in Egypt.
  Unable to stabilize the situation, he wrote a letter to Badr al-Jamali.
 The latter was a converted Armenian, the former press of the governor of Tripoli Jamal al-Dawla (hence the last part of his name).
  It is known that, in addition to the position of the governor of Accra, he was twice entrusted with the rule of Damascus.
  Responding to the caliph's invitation, after a 40-day voyage, Badr arrived in Cairo in his 100 sailing ships, organized the assassination of all disobedient emirs at a feast, and sold their soldiers into slavery.
  Al-Mustansir handed him the post of vizier.
 A new period began in the history of Egypt, when the decisive role in the system of government passed from the caliph to the vizier.
  Thus, Badr al-Jamali establishes peace throughout Egypt, taking over all power in the country.
Although Badr al-Jamali could not retake Syria from the Seljuks, in 1077 He defeated the Seljuk general Atsis, who was threatening Cairo.
 But the most important episode of his political activity concerns the internal life of Egypt.
 He established a vizier-hereditary dynasty. He was succeeded by 6 Armenian viziers, of whom Vahram (1135-1137) was a Christian.
 Badr also replaced the Fatimyan's expansionist ideology with an Egyptian-centric military dictatorship5.
 And finally, the decisive role of the Armenians was ensured in the country.
 Thus, the Armenians had a predominant number in Badr's army.
 The Armenian vizier, according to Matteos Urhayetsi, "burned a regiment of Armenian soldiers" 6.
The same is reported by the Arab historian Mikael Tinitsi. "Amir al-Ghuyush 1 Matthew Urhayetsi, p. 286.
2 Bozoyan A., Grigor B Vkayaser, "Christian Armenia", Yerevan, 2002, p. 228.
3 Kirakos Gandzaketsi, pp. 96-97.
 See also Barsegov Zh., Refusal of an Armenian from Beregovo Rights, "PBH", 1971, N 1, p. 97.
4 Matthew Urhayetsi, p. 228.
6 Matthew Urhayetsi, page 250.
(It is the title of Badr - SB) most of the army was composed of Armenians ”1.
  Thus, Badr al-Jamali relied entirely on the support of the Armenians, so he should have encouraged the visit of the Armenian Catholicos to Egypt.
 The number of Armenians settled in the country at that time reached "as if thirty thousand" 2.
 It is not by chance that Grigor Vkayaser ordains his nephew Grigor as the caring leader of the Armenians of those parts.
 This unprecedented rise of Armenian politicians in distant Egypt Dedeyan described it as the emergence of "a kind of exiled Armenia" 3.
 Considering 1038 He does not rule out the possibility that Catholicos Gregory could arrive in Egypt on a diplomatic mission as Emperor Michael's delegate4.
Thus, Gregory II the Witness, visiting the displaced parts of the Armenians, responded to the radical changes in the Armenian public life.
  By establishing direct ties with the Byzantine ruling circles, the papacy և the Fatimyans, the Armenian Catholicos pursued political goals, marking his activities with the merit of a diplomat.
Sargis Baldaryan GRIGORY II THE POLITICAL CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE WITNESSING OF THE WITNESSES AND THE TRAVEL
