DISPUTE QUESTIONS OF FORMATIC SAMPLICITY (ACCORDING TO N. PARNASYAN'S "GRAMMAR SAMPLES IN MODERN ARMENIAN" WORK)
  The history of the study of the question, unlike the word homonymy, is not rich, except for N. Parnasyan's "Grammatical Synonyms in Modern Armenian".
  It is presented through separate articles or reviews (R. Shalunts, E. Aghayan, G. Jahukyan, M. Asatryan, S. Abrahamyan, V. Vinogradov).
In Armenian grammar, N. was engaged in the comprehensive examination of grammatical homonyms. Parnasyan, who in his above-mentioned work has analyzed in detail the "linguistic" and "syntactic" synonyms of Armenian.
 In this work we have relied on the very provisions of that work, which, in our opinion, need to be reviewed and re-evaluated.
The subject of our work is the morphological homonymy, the purpose of which is to present our point of view of the analysis of non-equivalent separate realities in it.
Ն. Parnasyan defines grammatical synonyms as follows: "By grammatical synonyms we mean grammatical expressions, words, syntactic structures, which, being in the plan of the same expression, differ in the plane of content, that is, differ in their meaning, have different spheres of function and compatibility."
Grammatical homonymy operates on both "'s" and "syntactic" levels.
  While examining the idiological synonyms of modern Armenian, N. Parnasyan distinguishes two subsystems, namely "Synonym of's" »" Synonym of words ".
  The homonymy of the syllables is divided into two subsections: 1. "Grammatical syllables of the Holovman system և their homonymous series" և 2. "The homonymous series of grammatical syllables of the verbal system".
 To examine the homonymy of words, it divides it into four major sub-sections, namely, "Intersympathetic series of homonymous words in the verbal system", "Words of the same name operating in the noun system", "Kho 1 Parnasyan N., Grammatical synonyms in modern Armenian, Yerjan, 1979
Intersympathetic series of syllables of the syllables of the conjugation և syllable systems և և "Groups formed by the suffix after the transfer of parts of speech" (the last group represents the ratio of two or more parts of speech: noun-adjective, oblique syllable-adjective, etc.).
  We will abide by these principles put forward by the author; we will be the first to present our observations concerning the homogeneity of the characters.
1. First, let's talk about the "Ց" egg.
  Manuk Abeghyan mentions in connection with the issue. "The causal verbs of Ashkharhabar originate from the causal forms of the Engrabar, that is, the causal and the vowels are suppressed. For example, to fly, to reach, they become to fly, to deliver.
 The two consonants of the suffix, n,'s's, come together next to each other, the second letter of which comes out. For example, to surprise, to populate become to surprise, to populate և then to surprise, to populate ».
It should be noted that this term is used as a causal suffix.
  The Grabarian "utsan" ("oyts + an = utsan" originated, where the suffix "oyts" becomes "uts"), which, undergoing a phonetic change, transforms into a "tsn" suffix over time.
Speaking about the "J" egg, in the latter's homonymous series N. Parnasyan mentions the following: "causal sex suffix"; he brings the following example: "run + ts + nel".
  We do not agree with this statement for the following reason: the causal suffixes are "(a) ts", "(e) tsn", "tsn" և never "ts".
 The author in the word "kidnap", as we see, separates the part "nel", and the part "n" of that part is called "the current constituent", because it is preserved in the basis of the present, except for "n" և "ch" horrible. verbs 2.
 Ն. Parnasyan's observation is etymologically justified, which is visible in the case of a timeless examination.
 It should be noted that the concept of examining the semantic relations of words "words" is a simultaneous approach, because otherwise it will be impossible to specify the functions of those realities.
  Our goal is to study this grammatical homonym from a simultaneous point of view.
And in case of studying the word "ts" simultaneously, we will come to the conclusion that in modern Armenian, as we have mentioned, the suffixes "ats", "etsn", "tsn" are causal, but never "ts".
2. For the letter "Q" it mentions the fact that the nouns are a plural part of nouns, it brings the following example - "son + q".
 However, this is one of the remnants of Grabar, the existence of which is preserved, at least, only in the colloquial language, but never in the modern literary Armenian language.
 Let's bring a corresponding example. "He had many sons who lived in different states. Only his two sons, Grigor և Isa, who is my grandfather, remained in Yerevan" (P. Proshyan, Memoirs) 3.
 As can be seen from the example above, the noun "sons" in the sentence expresses the idea of ​​the plural, but this does not mean that it is a regular form of the plural.
1 Abeghyan M., Works, vol. F, Yerevan, 1974, p. 720.
2 Parnasyan N., page 38.
All examples provided by us are taken from the Armenian-Armenian National Corpus (EANC) electronic linguistic search engine (see www.eanc.net).
3. Speaking about "Ik" egg, N. Parnasyan mentions that it contains the following example: "built + you".
 In our opinion, the example given is not a derby of tomorrow, as there is no such derby in the modern Armenian conjugation calendar.
  It is not even a verb, because it is "deprived" of the main verbal features of gender գաղափար the idea of ​​the course of action, այդ, therefore, և such words are nouns, a circumstance which neutralizes the morphological homonymy և in this case1.
4. In the section on the homonymy of words, referring to the series "Aparni derby - indefinite derby sexual-tragic video" N. Parnasyan mentions. "The indefinite verb belongs to the number of independent or independent verbs, therefore its sexual-tragic syllable has an independent syntactic value, that is, it acts as a member of a word combination and then a sentence.
  It can be combined with both nouns and verbs.
  In the first case, it is a subordinate member of the noun phrase, expressing a relative relation (e.g. writing paper, eating bread, reading book, drinking water, etc.), in the second case, it is a subordinate member of the verb phrase, expressing a relation of purpose, ending (e.g. to dig և etc.) »2.
  In our opinion, instead of the phrase "deterministic relation" mentioned by the author, it would be correct to use the phrase "determinative relation", as the examples given by the author are, in fact, decisive, not determinative.
  Let's bring a corresponding original example. "Do not take our house as an example, father, think how many Armenians who are poor because of the Kurds do not have bread to eat" (Raffi, Khent, 1881).
  In the example given, the indefinite verb "to eat", which is placed in the genitive case, is decisive for the noun "bread".
5. Ն. Parnasyan classifies the homonymous homonyms of the verbs of the verbal system in the intersympathetic homonymous series, distinguishing four subsystems. a) homonymous verbs expressing the meaning of intransitive (he gives the following verbs as an example: "listen", "work", "live", "look", "wait"), b) Ordinary verbs expressing the meaning of the passive neutral gender ( gives as an example the following verbs - "get rid of", "rolled", "influenced", "armed", etc.), c) Causal-influential, causal-neutral consonants of the same gender (gives as an example the following verbs - "run", "To stop", "to tremble"), d) homonymous verbs expressing the meaning of intransitive և passive genders (cites the following verbs as an example: "written", "sent", "written", "read", etc.).
In our opinion, it is not right to single out the sub-item "Homogeneity of Bisexual Verbs" for several reasons. 1 Although some linguists (M. Asatryan, S. Abrahamyan) consider such a composition to be a past participle, we do not agree with that opinion on the above-mentioned grounds.
2 Parnasyan N., page 67.
a) Gender is a grammatical order of the verb, repetition in particular.
  It is neither a word, nor a word, nor a syntactic structure1.
 Gender is the main morphological feature that distinguishes a verb from other parts of speech.
Bisexuality is just a "type" of sex.
 We do not accept the idea that bisexual verbs are synonymous.
 They can simply express the meaning of intransitive in one case, passive in another, and neutral in the third.
 This, however, does not mean that they are synonymous.
 We think that in this case we are dealing with grammatical ambiguity.
b) We do not agree with point (c) separated by the author.
But it has three genders: intransitive, passive։ neutral.
 In parallel with them, the author distinguishes the so-called causal sex, while the causal sex (it is expressed by causal suffixes) is nothing but no influential gender.
  In other words, we cannot talk about homonymy here.
c) Recognition of homonymous words expressing the meaning of intransitive and passive genders does not seem convincing to us.
 It is known that the index of the passive gender is the passive suffix "v".
 Without this suffix, the verb will belong not to the passive gender, but to the infinitive.
  The author distinguishes two points from this point - about the adjacent derby - "the second horse of the morning derby".
  In our opinion, the second sub-item is generally unacceptable, as the second syllable of the verb aparn is missing in the conjugation of the verb.
 The author cites the words "to write" և "to read" as relevant examples.
 But in reality they are not verbs, but nouns.
 One և very exhaustive substantiation can be brought to prove this fact. Which word is supposed to have a gender to be considered a verb, and the above words lack this important morphological feature, therefore, they are not verbs, but nouns.
6. Ն. Parnasyan considers as a homonymous series the homonymous words found in the noun system, which "J. They are mainly connected with the manifestation of the order of existence ”2.
 We, however, think that there is no need to look for homonymy in the order of noun formation.
  It is true that, for example, "my student (d)" can mean "my (your) student" and "I (you), my student (d)", thus creating a homonym, but that homonym is manifested in the system, while in the syntax, both written and oral, these meanings are clearly expressed through punctuation, because the preposition requires a mandatory division: dumb, the reader or listener clearly understands, understands what the writer or narrator meant .
  We think we are talking about grammatical ambiguity.
7. We think that the opinion that the words composed of Ainatsants in modern Armenian are mainly adjectives (night, day, spring, love, etc.) should be accepted with reservation.
 However, a number of words with this suffix have the lexical value of the noun և »3, since the mentioned words, in our opinion, are on the way of lexical transmission, 1 To describe the grammatical homonymy, N. Parnasyan mentioned these categories.
2 Parnasyan N., page 78.
3 Ibid., P.
գործընթացը That process is not over yet!
 In our opinion, the "-ayin" suffix is ​​predominantly adjective, օրինակ the examples given by the author are adjectives.
  One can be convinced of that by studying these examples carefully ("strike", "front", "street", "ordinary", "army", "naval"). In all the examples given, when the word is used as a noun, it is used in the gender case, that is, "to spread the drum experience", "street behavior", "ordinary uniform", "army gathering", "naval courage" (except for one example, which is placed in the direct syllable, in the plural (in a definite article, "frontal"), which suggests that the word is not a noun but a noun adjective, such as "street"'s the same Let us use logic որպես as an adjective և as a noun.
 Thus, the following picture will be obtained: adjective - "street traffic", "noun" - "street behavior".
In the word combinations given, in our opinion, the word "street" is an adjective (or, alternatively, a pronoun), not a noun.
 This can be proved by the following "method" - "street behavior", that is, "street woman (girl) behavior".
 That is, these words are not grammatical synonyms.
  These express one meaning - adjective meaning.
8. Ն. Parnasyan, as a grammatical homonym of complications, mentions the words composed with the prefix "an-", which, according to the author, form a grammatical homonym because in one case they express a grammatical meaning of a subordinate, in another case - a relative derivation.
  He brings the following examples: "unfit" ("not fading", "not fading"), "unforgettable" ("unforgettable", "unforgotten"), etc.
 But, in our opinion, it is true that these other similar words are considered in the line of grammatical homonyms, because although they express the above-mentioned grammatical meanings, they are nevertheless adjectives.
 Adjectives and adverbs differ in their speech-language features in the given speech environment.
 It is true that both of them, in their main use, become complementary to the noun member, in particular, decisive, but this does not mean that they are identical (they differ, first of all, in the grammatical order that distinguishes them from other parts of speech).
  If we follow the same logic, then, based on the syntactic application, we must identify the qualitative adjective and the macabre.
 The above-mentioned can be considered synonymous, at least on a logical level, but not linguistically.
  Let's bring a corresponding example. "Everywhere there was inexhaustible pleasure, everywhere there was endless joy" (Raffi, Samvel, 1886).
 As the example shows, the word "immortal" is unmistakable.
9. "Sex-tracheal forms of a number of nouns that are the name of a substance form a homonymous series with adjectives formed from the same nouns with an adjective" 1.
  We do not agree with this statement.
  Let's explain on the basis of the example given by the author: "silver resources" (noun), "silver bracelet" (adjective).
  In our opinion, the latter is also a noun, which simply fulfills the determinant syntax 1 Parnasyan N., p. 95.
There is a position, that is, it shows the feature of what the bracelet is made of (silver).
  It would be an adjective if it was composed of the adjective suffix "-e" in modern Armenian - "silver bracelet".
  In this case, however, the current grammatical homonym would simply disappear: the noun "silver" would be on one end and the adjective "silver" on the other.
10. Ն. Parnasyan mentions that the series of the same name "Adsakan-makbay" brings examples to G. From Jahukyan's "Fundamentals of Modern Armenian Theory".
  Examples of these are "strong", "abundant", "cheerful", "playful", "good", "silent", "peaceful", "strict", "sullen", "short", "smooth", etc.
 In our opinion, these are not grammatical synonyms, because these words are only adjectives, not macabres.
 The examples given are mostly qualitative adjectives (except for a few examples, which are macabres).
  As we know, qualitative adjectives can be put on "nouns" and "verbs" at the same time, that is, they can become additions to "noun" and "verb" members.
 Putting on verbs, they mostly perform positions in the case of a horse (the position that is mainly used by the Maccabees, in particular, the Maccabees of the horse).
  Nevertheless, these words remain as qualitative adjectives; they do not make a word-transfer, thus excluding the emergence of the grammatical homonymous series "Adsakan-makbay".
Thus, studying the morphological homonymy, we noticed that there are many controversial issues in this "field".
  That is why in this work we have presented our observations of the above-mentioned controversial cases, which are noticeable in the grammatical system.
It should be noted that our observations are the result of the existing contradictions between the old and the new phenomena arising from the development of the living language, which does not diminish at all the work of one of the grateful people of Armenian linguistics, N. Parnasyan's work, the monograph "Grammatical Synonyms in Modern Armenian", remains a major work in the field of the study of Armenian grammatical synonyms.
 It is another matter that the need for a comprehensive, up-to-date study of the mentioned grammatical reality has matured.
Srbuhi GasoyanDZEVABANAKAN Ambiguity CONTROVERSIAL ISSUES (N. PARNASYANI "grammatical homonyms in Modern Armenian" work) Keywords ambiguity morphological ambiguity morphemes, word forms, declension, conjugation, synchronous (sinkhronik) and asynchronous (diakhronik) aspects, forms, formal plan, .
