HEADQUARTERS IN THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE (XVI-XIX CENTURIES) The Ottoman Empire, being one of the most powerful powers of its time, was a super-military religion, for which throughout history the obedience of many peoples living within it was the preservation of territorial integrity.
 The Islamization and Turkification of the population was the most important direction of the empire's policy.
  The policy of coercion was carried out through physical violence, massacres, massacres, as well as economic and moral pressures, creating severe social conditions, as a result of which the population was often faced with the last option of getting rid of them through unbearable deprivation and conversion to Islam.
  The policy of assimilation pursued by the Ottoman state led to the fact that after a short time the number of natives in the territory of the empire began to decrease, and the number of their invaders increased.
For a long time, the main source of income for the Ottoman state was the continuous wars, from which the majority of the population lived through looting.
  In addition, the permanent income was provided by the taxes and duties levied by the Ottoman subjects, which are increasing day by day.
The taxes paid by the Ottoman subjects were divided into two groups: legal (based on Muslim Sharia) and customary.
The first group included the following taxes: Ashar or late (tenth), kharaj, jizie.
  The number of ordinary taxes was very և unstable.
  At the same time, special taxes were levied, which were collected exclusively from non-Muslims.
 The most difficult of them from the social point of view was the head tax, the jizya.
 Almost until the end of the empire, the latter was destined to remain the strongest economic base for the persecution of non-Muslim subjects, oppression, various iniquities and arbitrariness.
Thus, the main, heaviest tax levied on non-Muslims in the Ottoman Empire was the head tax, which we find in Armenian historiography as "kharaj" and in Ottoman-Turkish documents as "jiziye".
  This tax has always been one of the most important sources of income for the Ottoman treasury.
To the Turks, jizya is largely perceived as equivalent to zakat (Muslim tithe) հարկ a tax paid instead of military service, and kharaj as equivalent to a "land tax" levied on Muslims.
Jizya is a tax levied on non-believers in Islamic countries, which is considered by jurists as a ransom for saving their lives during the conquests, for protection and for the inviolability of property1.
  The story of Jizyah dates back to the time when the Prophet Muhammad agreed with the Christians of Najran on the amount of tax they were obliged to pay to the Muslim state in their defense.
 According to this agreement, they had to pay 2,000 in Safar and 1,000 in Rajab during the month.
 Each piece of clothing was valued at about 40 dirhams.
 During the reign of Caliph Omar, the territory of the Islamic State increased significantly, շատ many Muslim nations belonging to it.
  The tax policy underwent some changes.
  Jizier was taken only from adults, from healthy men in freedom.
  The sick, children, women, slaves, and the elderly were exempted from this tax, because, according to Shari'a, jizyah should be paid only by those who are in principle able to fight against Muslims.
 There are different views in Islamic sects about the taxes paid by the clergy.
  Some sects allow it, and some do not.
 The size of the jizz depends on the material condition of the people1.
  Among the wealthy were wealthy money changers, cloth merchants, doctors, large landowners, and smallholders included tailors, painters, and other craftsmen.
 By paying Jizyah, non-Muslims were given the opportunity to live under the auspices of a Muslim state, under the protection of their freedom to practice their traditional religions.
  If a non-Muslim converted to Islam, he would get rid of Jizyah.
Only in the Ottoman Empire did the size of the Jizya begin to increase.
 The novelty was that the list of taxpayers included women who had inherited land.
In the Ottoman Empire, land, population, and taxes were recorded every 30 years, often in connection with changes in administrative units or the rise of a new sultan to the throne3.
  Basically, after each new Sultan ascended the throne, the size of the jizya increased significantly4.
  It was collected from all non-Muslim adult men in the Ottoman state.
  It is interesting to note a strong reference to Western Armenia when a young man was considered an adult. They measured the boy's neck with a string, gripping the ends of the string twice as long with their teeth, trying to pass the string around his head.
 If the thread did not cross, the teenager is considered a minor and a taxpayer5.
 The society that pays tribute or capital tax, depending on the economic status and solvency of a person, is divided into three levels: ala, evsatfedna.
 Each upper category gave a double of the lower, and the upper a quadruple of the lowest6.
This type of per capita tax could not remain stable due to changes in the state's material condition և exchange rate.
In the books of fiqh, although 48 dirhams of silver was envisaged for Jizyen ala for 48, 24 dirhams for սdna for evsat, or 4, 2 և 1os3, respectively, Papazyan A., Turkish Documents on the Armenians Հայաստանի (16-19th centuries), Yerevan, 1999 , page 81.
5 "History of the Armenian people", Yerevan, Armenian SSR Academy of Sciences Publishing House, 1972, page 73.
6 Avdalbekyan T., The floor in Turkey according to the data of Armenian historiography in the XVII-XVIII centuries, "PBH", 1959, p. 126.
However, this division was of a formal nature, as in principle this principle did not apply1.
 If in the 1500s. In the beginning the jizya was 25-28 acres, then in 1595-1604 it was 140 acres.
 1585 Murad III added the main tax of non-Muslim subjects of the empire to cover the budget deficit2.
Before Murad III, there were 30 akche for jizien ala and 20 akche for evsat 20 edna.
 During the reign of Murad III (1574-1595), alcohol was taxed as part of reforms to increase state revenue.
 We read in one of the Turkish sources that Tayber Ryan, complaining about the tax on drinks, demanded to remove it ևAdd to the jizya, and on that basis, the government increased the size of the jizya to 45, 30 և 15 akçe 3 respectively.
 One of the French researchers, Ebaski Elias, directly mentioning the reasons for the tax increase, gives a precise statement on this occasion. "If the state needed money, this type of tax (jizyen) would be doubled."
In one of the laihas presented to Murad IV, it is stated that before 1582 the jizya was charged at 40-50 akche, while during the reign of Murad IV (1612-1640) the jizya rose to 240 akche per capita5.
In the Ottoman tax system, all three forms of feudal rent existed: parochial, natural and monetary.
 The premium was the most common of all 6.
 However, the jizya was almost always paid in cash7.
 The money collected from this tax collected from non-Muslims constitutes the largest part of the empire's state budget; in this sense, it was the most important of the "legal" taxes in the tax hierarchy.
  1488-1489 The income of the Jizyah tax collected from the whole Ottoman Empire in 1528. reaches 8% of the total income of the empire8.
There were two ways of collecting gizzard: collective, that is, one general tax set for a whole group of people, which was levied at once, and individual, which was determined according to human property.
 The one-off method, on the one hand, guaranteed the government a stable income, on the other hand, allowed new members of the community to avoid paying jizya.
 The use of this tax-collecting horse often created the ridiculous situation when the villagers, being responsible for the whole community, were obliged to pay both for the dead and for those who had migrated from there.
  This situation paved the way for mass riots, sometimes leading to the disobedience of the whole village.
 Every few years, all adult non-Muslim taxpayers of Jizya were counted, during which the names of the dead and those who had emigrated from the area were removed from the lists.
  And the Jizya government is trying to collect the refugees at any cost through special tax collection.
 A right 3 "History of the Armenian people" was created, page 286.
4 Ibid., P.
6 Papazyan A., Turkish documents…, page 95.
8 Ibid., P. 105.
When mass conversions took place in different parts of the empire, especially in the Balkans. People converted en masse to Islam in order to get rid of the head tax1.
 It is possible to quote N. An excerpt from the book. "All Muslim-Christian peasants paid the part of the income's food, required by law, as a kind of income tax, to the state.
  However, more taxes were levied on Christians, as this situation, which was fully in line with Sharia law, had a positive effect on the policy of land Turkification. ”2
XVI-XVII centuries Due to the circumstances, the signs of the collapse of the team-military system, which is the cornerstone of the Ottoman society and is the cornerstone of its statehood, are becoming more and more obvious.
  Due to the influx of Spanish-American gold from the New World (America), there was a growing rise in prices, which brought with it the devaluation of the Turkish silver dram and high levels of inflation.
  The Ottoman government in 1584 he had to devalue his gold and silver coins.
 The Spanish ambassador writes to King Philip II: "The empire is so poor and exhausted that the only currency in circulation now is the aspers, which are made entirely of iron."
  Unemployment pushed people to spend counterfeit money and resort to various financial illegalities.
  The situation became so tense that the state itself began to falsify the money3.
Taxes and duties were constantly increased to fill the treasury.
In his message to Sultan Ibrahim (1640-1648), Kochi Bey wrote: "Avariz is the tax levied on every Muslim house (emphasis added - AS) in the amount of 300 akche.
 "The tax that is levied on unbelievers in the amount of 285 acres per capita is called 'kharaj.'
  In his message, Kochi Bey proposes to the Sultan to issue an order that the tax collectors do not take more than what is mentioned in the book while collecting loot and scum 4.
The fluctuations of Jizier's rates from place to place were too great.
  It is found in Armenian sources. In the inscriptions related to the XVII century we see that during the reign of Sultan Suleiman, in the XVII century. Lastly, the rate of kharaj collected from the city of Van ranged from 3-4 gold to 1 gold5.
  It can be noticed that the "kurush" comes with the "akche" մինչ "gold" used before.
 The history of Kurush begins in 1678, when it was put into circulation under Suleiman the Magnificent to replace European coins.
 Thus, the kurush surpassed the other Ottoman monetary units and was considered more expensive.
 Thus, in Van the head tax was 10 kurus or 400 para (1 kurush = 40 para), and in Kars - 16 para, that is, 25 times less 6.
Summing up the period under study, the following picture is obtained. 1690-1691 The rates of the different head tax are: edna - 2.5 kurush, evsat - 5 kurush, ala - 10 kurush.
 XVIII century Differential tax rates increase in the second half. edna - 4 kurush, evsat - 8 kurush, ala - 16 kurush.
3 Bayburdyan V., History of the Ottoman Empire, Yerevan, 2011, p. 308.
4 Papazyan A, Turkish documents։, page 93.
5 Avdalbekyan T., page 184.
6 Ibid., P.
Additional taxes under various names were levied on the population under the name of Jize.
 In Armenian sources, the illegally charged head taxes were called "additional head tax", "excess head tax", "more kharajm", "kharajikotor" and "haram kharaj".
  The extra head tax was relatively small.
Although the division of the population according to property was mostly formal, there are still facts in the canons when the social conditions of the villagers or the issue of land availability were often taken into account in some places.
 For example, the canons of the Bitlis vilayet state that in the Khoyt, Umur and Kevash districts, which are very inaccessible and rocky, there is very little cultivation and most of the wards are poor, with 35 acres per person.
 In the other Nahiyas, the jizya was 55 akche.
 And usually during the collection of the head tax the officials used rude arbitrariness, even during the wars the state imposed an illegal head tax twice a year.
  Those who were unable to pay the head tax were subjected to severe corporal punishment.
 Arbitrariness spread not only in the field of taxation, but also ignored the age of the boys and taxed them from a very early age.
 XVIII century Hagop Tivriketsi, one of the chroniclers, writes: "... և he would buy a lot of puppets from a five-year-old boy, no one could talk to him" 1.
 1830 Sultan Mahmud II tried to regulate the system by ordering to collect only legal taxes.
  However, at the same time, a number of illegal taxes were legalized2, so the social status of taxpayers did not change significantly.
Speaking of Jizi, we should also mention a tax that was applied in the Balkans during the pre-Ottoman period.
  We are talking about Spanish, which was 25 acres և was always paid in drams.
 It continued to be assembled when those Balkan territories were occupied by the Ottoman state.
 1540 The Ottomans introduced this type of tax into the tax system of Western Armenia and began to gather with the Jizya.
 In Ispenchnirakan it was the head tax levied on the landlord's tax collector է it was taken from all the non-Muslim inhabitants in general, mainly in 25 akchis3.
 Like Jizya, they got rid of this if they converted to Islam.
According to the Hanafi sect, which had an official status in the Ottoman Empire, the "people of the pen", that is, the Jews, were Christians.
  But both the laws and the practice of taxation of the clergy, as well as the practice of the clergy, are not only ambiguous in the Ottoman Empire, but we see contradictions in the articles on the same issue.
 For example, somewhere we read: "A Christian person, if he becomes a priest and works for the benefit of his people, will not pay for it.
  His wicked sons and those freed from slavery will pay the ransom tax. ”
  In another rule we meet. "The non-Muslim registered in Davtar, if he becomes a priest in the future, will continue to pay the taxes of the Spanish և kharaj.
  If a given religious person, being in a materially difficult situation, finds it difficult to pay the taxes of kharaj and ispench, then 1 Papazyan A, Turkish documents…, page 94.
3 Papazyan A., Turkish documents…, page 95.
nothing is taken from him. ”1
  For a Christian, active military service could be the only way to get rid of jizya.
 The families in the state service were released from Jizi.
Jizier was not so difficult for the first two levels, Alai և Evsat, as the third was for the poor.
 It happened that rich, wealthy members of both the Christian and Jewish communities set up charitable endowments to help poor members of their community pay jizyah.
 Some non-Muslims were looking for ways to avoid paying taxes.
One of the most common ways was for people to seek employment with European consuls, as they were exempted from the tax if they had such a job.
1855 On May 7, 1945, a new imperial decree abolished the long-established "kharaj" for non-Muslims and established the right to equal military service with Muslims4.
  Moreover, it became mandatory.
 At the same time, Christians had the right to buy their freedom by paying the prescribed amount and being released from military service.
A year later, a tax was formally established for it, bedel-iaskeriye, which replaced military service5.
  In fact, the head tax was replaced by a tax exemption for non-Muslims.
Thus, Christians were still completely isolated from military service, moreover, the military tax imposed for exemption from service was heavier than the head tax (it exceeded 10 times) 6.
 The proclamation caused great dissatisfaction among the Christian subjects of Turkey.
 The Muslims were very dissatisfied. "Christians were dissatisfied with the fact that, by enlisting in the Turkish army, they would direct their weapons against Christian states, especially Russia, with which they pinned their hopes of liberation, and fanatical Muslims feared losing their dominant position in the empire."
  Dissatisfaction on both sides forced the empire to postpone the task of recruiting troops from the Christians indefinitely7.
  This situation lasted until 1909, when the Ottoman parliament abolished the tax, making military service compulsory for all men, regardless of religion.
  This is the end of the history of the tax levied on non-Muslims in Ottoman Turkey.
As in all other spheres, so in the tax system, the Ottoman state pursued a policy of severe discrimination against the natives of the occupied territories.
 Due to the harsh tax policy, Ottoman Turkey solved several problems at once. He weakened the power and influence of non-Muslims, which he did not want. 1 Papazyan A., Turkish documents…, p. 82.
4 Papazyan A., The disenfranchised state of non-Turkish nations in the Ottoman Empire և Tanzimat, "Issues of Archeology", p. 1-2, Yerevan, 1983, p. 74.
6 Papazyan A., The disenfranchised state of non-Turkish nations…, p. 74.
7 In the same place.
By increasing their number, he changed the demographic picture of the population of the empire in favor of the Muslim Turks, enriched the state treasury.
Ani SarukhanyanCAP TAX IN THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE (XVI-XIX CENTURIES) Keywords: head tax (jizya), Ottoman Empire, tax system, non-Muslims, policy of forced assimilation, ala, evsat, edna, military service.
