THE ECUMENIC ACTIVITY OF KAREKIN I, THE ARMENIAN PATRIOT "You are one of the pioneers of the ecumenical movement."
 This is how Pope John Paul II described the ecumenical activity of His Holiness Karekin II, Supreme Patriarch and Catholicos of All Armenians2.
 Indeed, Patriarch Garegin I should be appreciated not only for the activation of the ecumenical ties of the Armenian Church, but also for the development of the ecumenical movement in general.
  When in 1940-1950. Ecumenism began to expand, including new Christian churches, and the future patriarch became involved in the movement.
While still a student at the Diocese of the Catholicosate of the Great House of Cilicia, the ideas of ecumenism fascinated the young clergy.
  "I entered the ecumenical movement from the very first days of my deaconship, when I was still a student, I followed the caring life of ecumenism, when it originated in Lyon, for example, by Abba Couturier J.," says Garegin I.
 In his own words, his ecumenical activity was greatly influenced by the words of Monsignor Willebrands, when the latter arrived in Antelias to negotiate with Catholicos Zareh I. "If we combine all the Gospel teachings into a hundred points, do you think you would not agree with ninety-nine of them?"
 "But, unfortunately, we talk more often about the only point on which our opinions differ, forgetting how much we have in common that can unite us."
  After the mentioned meeting, Garegin I says. "I learned that today we must, on the contrary, pay attention to what unites us.
 For me, this is the real strategy of ecumenism, so to speak, which օգ should help us enter the third millennium ”4.
The See of Cilicia had not yet become a member of the WCC, when Father Garegin was already participating in a number of inter-church conventions.
 The first participated in the Ecumenical Meeting of the Leaders of the Christian Student Movements in the Middle East (Beirut, 1955) 5.
The years of study at Oxford (1957-1959) provided a unique opportunity to become more closely acquainted with the ideology of ecumenism, to establish contacts with representatives of other Christian churches.
  The principle of the ecumenical movement is to first resolve the existing differences and problems between the churches, then to unite them.
 See "Christian Armenia" encyclopedia, Yerevan, 2002, p. 358.
2 "Etchmiadzin", 1996, 12, page 29.
3 Catholicos of All Armenians Garegin I, Conversations with Giovanni Guaita, Etchmiadzin, 2001, p. 229.
4 See ibid., Pp. 229-230.
5 See ibid., P. 229.
with.
  During his university years, Father Garegin, in a number of his reports, spoke about ecumenical problems, for example, what caused the disruption of the church? Theological dogmas or historical events? "We now have to face our 'ecumenical problems' and understand what really divides us."
In his essay "The Ecumenical Problem in the Christian East" (1959), Garegin I reaches the pinnacle of church division, the Council of Chalcedon.
  According to him, the current problems can be solved by reviewing the obstacles of the past. "The problem of reunification is real, both in the East and in the West.
 Reunification can not be fully understood through the East-West mediator until they first unite themselves ”2.
WCC New Delhi (India) 1961 From the beginning of the 19th century, Rev. Garegin began to participate in the Council's conferences, first as an observer, then, when the Catholicosate of Cilicia became a member of the Council of Europe (August 1962, through the three efforts of the "Devoted Ecumenist").
  In order to develop the ecumenical ties of the Cilicia Catholicosate, he organized the visits of the Catholicos of the Great House of Cilicia to the Council of Europe, the Archbishop of Greece, Pope John Paul II, the Archbishop of Canterbury, etc.
As an observer, Archbishop Garegin participated in three consecutive sessions of the Second Vatican Council (1963-1965) and the Lambeth Conference of the English Church (1968) 4.
 After returning from the meeting, he wrote one of his valuable articles: "Some observations of the observer-deputy of the Archelian Church to the second Vatican meeting."
He was instrumental in organizing the Conference of the Heads of the Orthodox Sister Churches of the Orthodox Church in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia (1965), as well as in the establishment of the Conference of the Churches of the Middle East5.
  He was a member of the "Faith Order" World Conference (1963) 6.
1960s Archimandrite Garegin has held a number of responsible positions in the WCC.
  1968 At the conference in Uppsala, Sweden, Bishop Garegin was elected a member of the WCC Central Executive Committee7.
In his article "Ecumenical Trends in the Armenian Church" 8 Garegin I briefly presents the path of the Armenian Church from the Council of Chalcedon to the 20th century.
 He tries to show that the Armenian Church does not have a non-ecumenical spirit, as any opinion has ruled in the Christian world.
During the presidency of the Diocese of North America և Canada (1973-1977), Archbishop Garegin continued to establish ecumenical ties with representatives of other churches.
  As 2 See ibid., P.
3 This is how Catholicos Garegin I was named on the occasion of his death in the WCC condolence letter.
 See "Etchmiadzin", 1999, E, page 171.
4 Ibid., P.
5 "Christian Armenia" encyclopedia, page 199.
6 "Etchmiadzin", 1999, E, pp. 171-172.
7 See ibid., Pp. 171-172.
8 See Karekin I, pp. 253-267.
he says. "As an Armenian bishop, I lived primarily in the United States as a member of the Armenian Church. At the same time, I maintained strong ties with American church organizations, such as The National Council of Churches of the USA, as well as ecumenical. , Catholic, Orthodox այլ with other Protestant circles ”1.
Evaluating his ecumenical activity և his devotion to the movement, 1975 At the 5th WCC Conference convened in Nairobi, Kenya, Archbishop Garegin was elected Vice-Chairman of the WCC Central Executive Committee, serving until 1983.
Supported the establishment of the Middle East Council of Churches (WCC).
 When the presidency of the Council of Europe ends, the future patriarch is given the honor of "Honorary President" 3.
The ecumenical activity of the Catholicosate of the Great House of Cilicia expanded even more when Garegin Sargsyan was first elected Catholicos of the Great House of Cilicia (1977-1983), then Catholicos of the Great House of Cilicia under the name of Garegin II (1983-1995).
1995 On April 4, the National-Church Assembly elected him Catholicos of All Armenians.
 The newly elected patriarch moves his energetic ecumenical activity to the Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin. Etchmiadzin 4.
It is safe to say that Garegin I was indeed endowed with an ecumenic.
  One memorable work he has done invaluable in the ecumenical heritage of the Armenian Patriarch.
  As a result of his efforts, the two Catholicosates, separated from each other for a long time, finally established close fraternal relations between Cilicia and Etchmiadzin.
Before assuming the position of Catholicos in the Mother See, Garegin I paid a series of visits to Etchmiadzin during the reign of Vazgen I (of course, his role in this issue should not be underestimated). "My personal relations with Catholicos Vazgen have always been friendly.
  I remember, as if it was yesterday, 1956. His visit to Antelias on the occasion of the election of the Catholicos of the Great House of Cilicia.
 At that time I was still a new teacher.
 On the feast of Tiarnandaraj, on February 14, I conducted a liturgy և, according to our ritual, at the end of the Liturgy I offered him a relic.
  He asked what my name was. He congratulated me on the name of the monk Garegin, in honor of Catholicos Garegin Hovsepyan.
  Later he said that he liked me from the very first meeting.
 I have always treated him with great respect ... ”5.
1988 This summer, the two Catholicos meet for the second time in Moscow during the celebration of the millennium of Russian baptism.
 Vazgen I invites him to Etchmiadzin.
  Two delegations (from Etchmiadzin and Antelias) were formed to study the differences between the two seats.
  1988 During the Spitak earthquake in December, Catholicos of Cilicia Garegin II visited Armenia.
  He sent a circular letter to all the dioceses of the See of Cilicia asking for help.
  Many of the bishops of Cilicia went to Armenia, 1 Garegin I, pp. 65-66.
2 "Echmiadzin", 1999, E, pp. 171-172.
3 See ibid., P. 172.
4 The Mother See became a member of the WCC during the reign of Vazgen I in 1962. on August 11.
5 Garegin I, pp. 116-117.
to express their solidarity with the Patriarch of All Armenians.
 All this at the same time created a favorable atmosphere for the solution of the problems of the two chairs.
During the tenure of Karekin I, the Mother See had its permanent representatives at all annual sessions of the WCC.
  The visit of His Holiness Karekin I to the WCC Center (born in Switzerland, June 10, 1996) is significant.
 During the one-day visit, His Holiness meets with WCC Secretary General Dr. Conrat Raiser, Secretary General of the EEU (European Conference of Churches) Jean Fischer Ռ Head of the Relief Assistance Division of the Swiss Protestant Churches Rudolf Renfer 1.
In its turn, in 1996 April 19-23 Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin Echmiadzin is visited by WCC Secretary General Conrat Raiser2.
  Among the many visits of the Patriarch for the normalization of inter-church relations are the visits to the Vatican (December 1996), France (January 1997), Australia (February 1972).
1997 The 2nd European Ecumenical Conference organized by the Council of European Churches and the European Council of Catholic Bishops is taking place in Graz, Austria, on June 23-29, 2010. The second plenary session is addressed by His Holiness Karekin I.
  The theme of His Holiness's speech was "Face to face with ourselves" 3.
During the reign of Garegin I, the Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin Etchmiadzin has always had its representatives in the WCC Central Committee.
 On the 10th anniversary of the Spitak earthquake, a joint prayer was offered at the 8th WCC Conference (December 1998, Harare, Zimbabwe) for the peace of the earthquake victims և for the restoration of Armenia4.
1997 The WCC Armenian Inter-Church Round Table Charitable Foundation is established.
 In order to overcome the difficult economic situation of the country, under the direction of Catholicos Garegin I, the Round Table Office initiates the implementation of a rural credit program.
 His Holiness is applying to the Ecclesiastical Credit Ecumenical Fund (EEU, center: Gen.) to include the Armenian EEU in the EEU family.
  The EEU meeting held in Bratislava, the capital of Slovakia, on January 26-31, 1999, discussed the application of the Apostolic Church and gave a positive answer.
 A decision is made to finance the Round Table loan programs for the next three years5.
On the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the founding of the Council of Europe and the 1700th anniversary of the proclamation of Christianity as the official religion in Armenia, His Holiness Karekin II is published in New York. Garegin I English collection of essays of the Armenian Patriarch "... And the ship sways on the waves".
  This collection includes the articles authored during the care of His Holiness, in which Garegin I raises a number of ecumenical problems and gives ways to solve them.
 Paying attention to the subtitle of the book: "Echmiadzin", 1996, Z, pp. 66-79.
  See also "N.S.O.T.T. The biennial information of the Catholicos of All Armenians Garegin I ", Montreal, 1997, page 11.
2 See ibid., P.
3 "Echmiadzin", 1997, Z-E, pp. 28-49.
4 "Echmiadzin", 1998, 12, pp. 104-107.
5 "Etchmiadzin", 1999, A, pp. 109-110.
Letters made during the ecumenical journey ”, it becomes clear that the collection includes the ecumenical thinking that arose during the ecumenical path of His Holiness1.
By Arpi AleksanyanGAREGIN I, THE ECUMENIC ACTIVITY OF THE ARMENIAN PATRIOT Keywords: Ecumenism, Ecumenical Movement, WCC - World Council of Churches, Theological Dogma, Council of Chalcedon.
