QUANTOCHEMICAL CALCULATION OF ETHYLMETHYSULON PHONE WITH THE HELP OF THE GAUSSIAN 03 PROGRAM The study of sulfur-containing compounds, sulfoxides ֆ sulphons is of great interest.
  Dimethylsulfone is the result of the oxidation of atmospheric dimethylsulfide.
  Studies have shown that dimethyl sulfone can interact with water to promote the formation of aerosols in the atmosphere that form the basis of clouds.
  Dimethylsulfone is also of great biomedical importance [6], it is a transport molecule in the body for elemental sulfur, a source of sulfur for the amino acids methionine and cysteine.
  The structural and spectral properties of dimethylsulfone have been studied by various authors [1, 3, 4], but there is no data in the literature on subsequent homologues, in particular ethylmethylsulfone.
 In recent years, ethylmethylsulfone has been widely used in elite batteries as an electrolyte.
The aim of our work is to calculate the geometric-spectral parameters of ethylmethylsulfone with the help of Gaussian 03 software package.
 The results were compared with the properties of dimethyl և diethylsulfone.
Experimental part.
 Quantochemical calculations of the isolated molecule of ethylmethyl sulfone were performed using HyperChem և Gaussian 03 software.
In HyperChem, the optimization of the initial geometry of the molecule was carried out by MM + և semi-empirical methods of molecular mechanics AM1, PM3, MNDO.
  The Z-matrix of ethylmethylsulfone optimized by the semi-empirical method was introduced into the Gaussian 03 program.
  In Gaussian 03, the optimization was performed using the restricted Hartree-Fock (RHF) method with the following bases: 6-31G (d), 6-311G (d), 6-311G (d, p).
  The 6-31G (d) loader set used simple Gaussian functions to describe deep orbitals, 3 և 1 functions for valence s- և p orbitals, and a set of six functions for d-orbitals.
  The next step in increasing base collections is p-
Addition of functions for hydrogen և helium atoms.
 To optimize, the following command was given: # RHF / 6-31G (d) opt.
 The key word Opt means optimization action.
  In addition to the calculation of geometric parameters, the theoretical oscillation spectra of the mentioned molecule were also calculated.
  The keyword Freq was added to the command for that action.
 GaussView software was used for spatial representation of molecules.
The results և their discussion.
  In the first stage of the work, the geometry of the isolated molecule of ethylmethylsulfone was optimized by MM + և semi-empirical molecular mechanics methods AM1, PM3, MNDO with the help of HyperChem program.
  Then, in order to reveal the spatial structure of the stable conformations of ethylmethyl sulfone, molecular-conformational analysis was performed, and the dependence of the potential energy on the amphibian angle was determined.
 Figure 1 shows the potential energy dependence of ethylmethylsulfone (calculated by the semi-empirical AM1 method) from the binomial S1C5C6H13.
  As can be seen from the graph, unstable conformers are observed in the case of 69, 129, 250 S1C5C6H13 two-sided angles, and stable conformers are observed in the case of 70, 190, 310 S1C5C6H13 two-sided angles.
In the next step, the geometrical parameters of ethylmethylsulfone were calculated using the Hartrey-Fock limited method with different bases using the Gaussian03 program.
  Fig. Figure 2 shows the spatial structure of the most stable conformals of ethylmethyl sulfone optimized by the RHF / 63111G (d, p) method.
 The calculated geometric parameters (bond lengths, valence և celestial angles, energies, dipole moments և charges) are summarized in salt. In 1.
Figure 1. Potential energy dependence of the ethylmethylsulfone molecule at an amplitude S1C5C6H13. Figure 2. Spatial structure of ethylmethylsulfone optimized by the RHF / 6311G (d) method. From 1, the most stable conformations of the ethylmethylsulfone molecule (with the lowest energy) are observed with the RHF / 6-311G (d, p) base application.
  As the base expands, dipole momentum increases, S = O և SC bonds shorten, and the OSO angle decreases.
It should be noted that the optimization of the geometry of the dimethylsulfone molecule on the basis of RHF / 6-311G (d, p) reproduces the experimental data quite well, in particular, the most accurate value of the bond length S = O is considered.
  Therefore, to compare the geometric spectral parameters of dimethylsulfone, ethylmethylsulfone և diethylsulfoniometer, the countdown was performed only using the RHF / 6-311G (d, p) base.
Table 1. Geometrical parameters of the ethylmethyl sulfone molecule, calculated by the Hartrey-Fock method, E, Hartley μ, Dag. Figure 2 summarizes some of the geometric parameters of dimethylsulfone, diethylsulfone, ethylmethylsulfone, calculated on the basis of RHF / 6-311G (d, p), as well as sulfur-oxygen charges.
  As can be seen from the table, in the series dimethylsulfone, ethylmethylsulfone, diethylsulfone, the bonds S = O երկար SC lengthen, the OSO angle decreases, the sulfur charge increases, and the oxygen charge decreases.
 The value of dipole momentum is the highest in the case of ethylmethyl sulfone.
In addition to the geometric parameters, the IC spectra of dimethylsulfone, diethylsulfone և ethylmethylsulfone were calculated by the RHF / 6-311G (d, p) method.
  Dimethylsulfone has 27 normal fluctuations, diethylsulfone - 45, and ethylmethylsulfone - 36.
 Fig. 3 presents the theoretical EC spectrum of ethylmethylsulfone.
Table 2. Geometric և spectral parameters of dimethyl-, ethylmethyl- և diethylsulfone molecules, calculated by the Hartrey-Fock finite RHF / 6-311G (d, p) method E ), cm-1 Figure 3. Theoretical EC spectrum of ethylmethylsulfone, calculated by the Hartrey-Focus-restricted RHF / 6-311G (d, p) method. The antisymmetric և symmetric oscillation frequencies of 13 cm-1 (8 cm-1) compared to ethylmethylsulfone in the case of ethylmethylsulfone move to the low frequency domain due to the more polar nature of the S = O bonds.
Literature pairs and solvation of Li + ion in sulfones.
  phase diagrams, conductivity, Raman Spectra, and Ashot Mkhitaryan.
