TYPE DIVERSITY OF PANELS AROUND A SMALL VILLAGE The order of rodents in the Republic of Armenia is represented by 34-36 species, 7 of which belong to the gray field mice, 1 to the water field mice, and one to the snow field.
  Most of these field mice have unitary statuses է listed in the International Red List.
  The new RA Red Book includes only Shidlovsky field mouse (Fig. 1), which is widespread in Shirak region.
Figure 1. In common field mice kargavichakeTesaki anvanumeMijazgayin Red girkHH Red girkSovorakan dashtamukHasarakakan dashtamukTputayin dashtamukLernamargagetnayindashtamukArevelaevropakan dashtamukShidlovsku dashtamukShlikovnikovi dashtamukDzyan dashtamukNvazaguyn risk takgtnvoghNvazaguyn risk takgtnvoghNvazaguyn risk takgtnvoghNvazaguyn risk takgtnvoghNvazaguyn risk takgtnvoghNvazaguyn risk takNvazaguyn risk takgtnvoghgtnvoghDashtamknere have great biological significance, handisanalovsnndayin important link in the pyramid.
  Many of them can be carriers or spreaders of various infectious diseases.
In the Republic of Armenia, field mice are found in the whole territory, occupying different landscapes and climatic zones.
The study of the field mice around the village of Kuchak is used for us by the fact that these areas are areas of distribution of different types of sympathetic populations.
 Therefore, we have set a task to study the species composition of the field mice in the area in order to study the inter-species relations in the future.
Materials և methods.
 Material:
 The material for the research was 16 field mice caught near the village of Kuchak.
  The animals were caught with the help of special animals, sometimes by hand, from straight nests.
 The animals caught for sorting were subjected to geological-cranial measurements, the teeth were examined especially, especially the soles of the feet.
Psychological method.
  To determine the species composition, morphological measurements were made (Fig. 1), the following measurements were taken. m - body mass MU - total body mass PE - tail length AE - ear length GE - skull length AEE - distance from eye to ear - CE - distance from nose to ear OE - foot length SE - calf length AM - space between eyes Ophthalmology Cranial measurements.
  Skull measurements were performed. Figure 1. When taking morphological measurements (according to Marcov et al 2010, see Figure 1). Figure 1. Skull measurements Study of the dentition.
 To determine the species composition, a study of the denture structure of mice was performed.
 In particular, in order to distinguish the two types, it was necessary to thoroughly study the structure of the third mandibular upper tooth.
Statistical analysis.
  Statistical analysis of the data was performed using Statistica 7.0 software.
Results և discussion.
  During the studies, 12 animals were collected, on which morphological and cranial measurements were made, and the denture was examined.
  Analysis of morphological measurements showed that the animals have 4 characteristics, namely: AE, KAE, AEE, MA (Fig. 2), but this is not enough to determine the species.
Comparison of the average values ​​of morphological measurements Figure 2.BL -ME, TL -PE, EL - AE, NEL -QAE, EEL-AAE, BE-MA, FL - Comparison of the general components of cytological-cranial measurements showed that the mentioned animals are mainly different v 7 և v with 23 features, which are the length of the upper diastema ություն the length of the lower tooth (Fig. 3).
Figure 3. CONTINUOUS MEASUREMENTS allowed to distinguish 2 identical animals, which are clearly different from other individuals.
 In order to determine the species composition of the remaining 10 individuals, a detailed study of the structure of the third dentition of the upper jaw was performed (Fig. 2).
 The following image was received. The second outer and second inner triangles of the upper third tooth are fused in some of the animals (Fig. 2a, 1; the general section is shown by an arrow), and in the others, separated (Fig. 2b, 2, the arrow shows a clear demarcation zone). .
As a result of our research, we found out that our collection is divided into 3 groups according to morphological and cranial criteria.
  In addition, a statistical analysis was performed among these groups, which shows a certain deviation - incompatibility with the data obtained during the geological studies.
  This incompatibility ումը deviation is mainly related to the number of animals being compared, as a larger number of animals is needed for complete statistically accurate data.
 However, based on the data we have, և և և և և և և և և նելով։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։։
Literature from Hungary.
  craniometrical evidence for its taxonomic detachment, “Turk J Zod”, 2012, the Quaternary fossil record.
 a comparison of morphological and molecular methods to identify6. Red Book of Animals of the Republic of Armenia, Yerevan, 2009.
Lusine Rzazyan TYPE DIVERSITY OF PANICS AROUND KUCHAK VILLAGE Keywords: field mouse, zoological-craniometric measurements, table teeth structure.
