THE IMPORTANCE OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A DEFENDANT, THE FOUNDATIONS AND THE TRIAL PROCEDURE
In the system of subjects of criminal proceedings, the accused has a special place, around which the whole criminal procedure activity is carried out.
  Defendant is the person who has been decided to be involved as an accused (Criminal Procedure Code, Article 64).
Involvement of a person as an accused is one of the characteristics of the preliminary investigation of a criminal case, which gives a proper process to the investigation of the case.
If there is a combination of sufficient evidence proving the commission of a crime by the person, the investigator and the prosecutor make a reasoned decision to involve the person as an accused (Criminal Procedure Code, Article 202, part 1, 2).
According to the current RA Criminal Procedure Code, the decision to involve a person as an accused is made by the investigator և the prosecutor, but mostly by the investigator, but according to the RA RA Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) the investigator is deprived of that right. he can only petition to make a decision to involve the accused in person.
 Thus, in accordance with Article 191, Part 3 of the Draft, in the presence of the facts provided for in Part 2 of this Article, the investigator has the right to submit a motion to the supervising prosecutor as a defendant, attaching the proceedings, pointing to the evidence supporting those facts.
 In case of arrest of a person on the basis of a well-founded suspicion, the investigator shall submit the motion mentioned in this part to the prosecutor supervising the materials no later than 24 hours from the moment of handing over the decision of arrest to the person.
  According to the draft, the prosecutor makes the decision to involve the person as an accused.
  Thus, according to the Draft, the supervising prosecutor makes a decision on involving the person as an accused within 12 hours after receiving the substantiating materials, and in case of not finding grounds for criminal prosecution, rejects the investigator's motion by his decision (Article 191, part 4 of the Draft).
  In our opinion, such a regulation found in the Draft is justified, as it is a rather responsible judicial act due to its judicial significance, and its adoption by the prosecutor can significantly improve the quality.
  One of the reasons for reserving such a right to the prosecutor is that initiating criminal prosecution under Article 103 of the RA Constitution is the exclusive authority of the prosecutor, and this should be reflected in the criminal procedure legislation.
  However, the prosecutor is not given enough time to make a decision, as he or she must review the case file sent by the investigator within 12 hours and make a decision to involve the accused on that basis.
  We should not forget the fact that the decisions must be reasoned, then the question arises whether he will be able to make a reasoned decision in that short period of time.
  Therefore, we propose to increase the period provided by the Draft to 24 hours so that the prosecutor can make a proper decision.
The basis for involving a person as an accused is a combination of sufficient evidence proving that he has committed a crime, on the basis of which the investigator and the prosecutor deem it necessary to charge him with a crime.
A. Rizhakov considers that the basis for involving the person as an accused is the illegality of the act և the investigator's conviction of the person's guilt1.
 It is difficult to agree with such an approach, because conviction alone is not enough to involve a person as an accused.
We would like to draw attention to one circumstance, the "sufficiency of evidence."
 The criminal procedure legislation does not provide an explanation of the concept of "sufficient evidence", ie the question arises: what combination of evidence is sufficient to make a decision to involve a person as an accused?
 The concept of "sufficient" is itself an evaluative category.
  In this case, in order to investigate the adequacy of the evidence, one must take into account the fact that the combination of evidence is being assessed at the time of the examination of the case.
L. According to Mariupolsky, "by sufficient evidence we mean a body of evidence which is the basis for an accusation, which exposes a specific person who has committed a crime and confirms the existence of the characteristics of a crime in the proceedings."
  According to some authors, evidence is sufficient to prosecute if it describes every element of a crime3.
In our opinion, the following definition in the legal literature on the notion of "sufficiency of evidence" for involving a person as a defendant is well-founded: "Sufficiency of evidence is the data verified by the investigator in accordance with the law, which leads to a joint" correct inaccuracy ". that a specific person has committed a crime envisaged by the Criminal Code չէ is not subject to exemption from criminal liability ”4.
1 See Рыжаков А., Обвиняемый, Москва, 1999, էջ 16.
2 See Mariupolsky L., Attraction in the quality of accusation, Moscow, 1976, page 11.
3 See Karneeva L., Attraction to Conventional Responsibility, Law and Obligation, Moscow, 1971, p. 5.
4 See Gromov N., Franciforov Zh., Establishment and procedural order of attracting persons to the accusation, "The Follower", 1998, № 8, page 44.
It is commendable that the Draft refrained from using such an assessment notion; rather, it chose a wording to substantiate the decision to involve the person as an accused.
  According to Article 191, Part 2 of the Draft, a person is prosecuted on the basis of facts proving that he / she has committed a crime, ie the person is involved as a defendant only on the basis of facts of crime committed by him / her, which must be confirmed by evidence cited in the proceedings.
By a combination of evidence, we mean all the evidence that is gathered at a particular time in the case և is evaluated.
Part of that combination is "evidence that will be assessed as credible" and "evidence that may later be considered unreliable" rejected by the investigator and the court 1.
When making a decision to involve a person as an accused, it must be proved that the act: 1. has it been committed or not? 2. has been committed by the person about whom the issue of involvement as a defendant should be resolved, 3. contains the features of a crime.
The amount of damage caused by the crime, the combination of mitigating and aggravating circumstances, the circumstances characterizing the accused, the motives of the crime that do not affect the qualification of the act, the circumstances contributing to the crime, as well as other circumstances can be raised after the accusation.
The investigator must make a decision on involving the person as an accused immediately after gathering sufficient evidence for that.
 An early resolution of this issue is fraught with the risk of violating the rights and legitimate interests of innocent people.
  In practice, the cases when involving a person as an accused and bringing charges are artificially delayed until the end of the preliminary investigation.
 As a result of such a delay, the person is, in fact, deprived of the right that the law reserves for the accused, that is, the right of the accused to defense is violated.
  Sufficient time is needed to defend oneself from the accusation, to build a defensive tactic, which, in the mentioned case, is, in fact, absent.
 The person must know in time what he is accused of, in order to be able to use his right to defend himself against the accusation.
  "Involvement as an accused should be done immediately after gathering enough evidence for that.
  Involvement as a defendant immediately before the end of the investigation does not allow for a comprehensive check of the defendant's explanations.
  In that case, he is deprived of the opportunity to fully exercise his procedural rights in time ”2.
Still A. Connie noted that "caution is needed to involve a person as an accused.
 However, it should not be confused with deliberately slow 1 See “RA criminal proceedings.
 Special part ", Yerevan, 2010, page 91.
2 See "Scientific-practical comments on the procedural code of the RSFSR", ed. 2nd, Moscow, 1997, page 213.
which invalidates the rights of the accused. ”1
  A. Connie rightly criticizes "unilateral prosecution activity" when he engages the investigator as a defendant at the end of the investigation, almost on the eve of sending the case to the prosecutor, which, in fact, deprived the accused of the opportunity to truly defend himself2.
Therefore, we suggest cr. trial Rewrite Part 2 of Article 202 of the Code as follows: "If there are grounds to involve the person as an accused, the investigator or the prosecutor shall immediately make a reasoned decision to involve the person as an accused."
  This procedure guarantees the protection of the accused.
The following question is also a matter of dispute in the judicial literature: whether evidence should be mentioned in the decision to involve a person as an accused or not.
 In practice, most investigators, in making such decisions, refer to the general circumstances of the criminal case without pointing out specific evidence.
 Some forensic experts consider that the investigator should indicate in the decision what materials led him to such an investigation3.
 Many of the authors have expressed the opinion that the decision to involve a person as an accused should contain references to the factual data, the evidence, which served as a basis for making the appointed decision4.
One of the requirements of the current criminal procedure legislation is that the decision to involve someone as an accused must be reasoned (Article 202 of the Criminal Procedure Code, part 2).
  The descriptive-causal part of the decision shall indicate the name, surname of the accused, other information about him, the formulation of the accusation, indicating the place, time, method of the crime, other circumstances, as far as they are clarified by the case materials.
The final part sets out the decision to involve the person in the case as an accused և Article of the Criminal Code, part or article of the article, which provides for liability for the crime committed.
As we understood from the legislative wording, the circumstances mentioned in the decision, including the wording of the accusation, are clarified from the available materials.
 The material obtained in the case can also be considered the information obtained through operative means, which cannot be used as evidence, that is, that important decision is based not on the evidence, but on the materials in the case.
 It is necessary to submit the relevant article of the Draft, according to which the name of the person, surname, patronymic are mentioned as a decision on involving the accused. 1 See Koni A., Sobr. soch., t. 4, Moscow, 1967, page 186.
2 See ibid., P. 136.
3 See Strogovich M., The right to be accused of protection and presumption of innocence, Moscow, 1984, p. 78.
4 See Polnyansky N., Questions of theories of the Soviet role-playing process, Moscow, 1956, p. 196.
 Savicki V., The Doctrine of Reconstruction, Tashkent, 1986, p. 81-82. (Moreover, V. Lukashevich considers it necessary not only to refer to the evidence in the decision to involve the accused, but also to present (nominate) it to the accused during the first interrogation, see Lukashevich V., Establishment of Conventional Responsibility in the Soviet Conventional Trial, Leningrad, 1985, pp. 138-139).
other data, the factual basis of the accusation: the essence of the accused act, place, time, method և other circumstances, as far as they are clarified by the available evidence, as well as the article, part or article of the Criminal Code, which envisages responsibility for the committed criminal act (legal act For an assessment, see Article 191 (5) of the Draft.
  The circumstances mentioned in the draft decision are clarified by the available evidence.
 However, as we see, neither the current criminal procedure legislation nor the decision on involving the Draft as a defendant does not indicate evidence.
The content of the decision to involve the person as an accused may be considered.
 After all, to know what they are accusing means to know the essence of the accusation, and then to defend oneself from it.
  The investigator mentions the formulation of the accusation in the given decision, as well as the relevant article of the Criminal Code, which envisages responsibility for the committed crime.
Article 6 3 3 of the European Convention lists the following minimum rights of the accused: (a) to be informed promptly and in detail of the nature of the charge against him, (b) sufficient time and opportunity to prepare his defense.
As for the "nature" of the information to be transferred to the accused, "nature" means the crime for which he is charged (ie, the legal description), and the word "basis" indicates the actions that the latter allegedly committed.
  The details of the crime are extremely important, as from the moment of their presentation the accused is officially informed about the factual and legal grounds of the accusation against him1.
The European Court of Human Rights in the case of Matzia v. Italy found that the applicant's rights to be informed in detail about the charges against him and to have adequate time and opportunity to prepare his defense had not been fully complied with The applicant was not given adequate opportunity to defend himself.
In the case of Pelissier v. France, the European Court clarified the scope of the information provided to the accused on the basis of the mentioned sub-clause.
 According to the Court, this information should specify not only the grounds for the accusation, that is, the act allegedly committed by the accused on which the accusation is based, but also the legal qualification of that act3.
The Court of Cassation Papyan's case stated that the accusation should reflect the actions of the accused or inaction 1 See “Pellissier and Sassi v. France ”, Judgment of 25 March 1999.
2 See “Mattoccia v. Italy ”, Judgment of 27 July 2000.
3 See “Pellissier and Sassi v. France ”.
The content of the crime should, in turn, include factual data characterizing all the mandatory features of the crime.
 The latter is a necessary precondition for mentioning in the accusation the criminal law, which envisages the features of a dangerous, unlawful criminal punishment for the society, that is, to lead to giving a legal assessment in accordance with the act formulated in the accusation1.
Regarding this judicial institution, M. Strogovich noted that it is necessary to accept that the involvement as an accused can have a positive meaning for the subject in some respects, as by law he is endowed with certain rights to deny the accusation, with guarantees to ensure their implementation. They would not have happened if a preliminary investigation had been carried out against that person, but without involving the accused.
In this case, the mentioned person would have the opportunity to refute the accusation, to present arguments and evidence to justify himself only at the end of the preliminary investigation, which would have been carried out without his participation.
  Therefore, involving a person as an accused is to some extent "favorable" for the person involved as an accused2.
 It is true that we do not agree with the opinion that involving the accused as a defendant is in the best interests of the accused, but at the same time we accept that such a decision should be made during the preliminary investigation of the criminal case, if, of course, there are grounds for the accused to know the substance of the accusation. be able to exercise his right of defense.
In our opinion, in the current legislation, as in the draft, the use of the term "accused" is not so justified.
 In essence, it follows from the principle of the presumption of innocence, according to which a person accused of a crime is presumed innocent until proven guilty in accordance with the law by a court judgment that has entered into force.
  In addition, we should not forget that there is an idea of ​​a "reasonable observer" to which a "reasonable opinion" can be formed.
And in this case, the "reasonable observer" will have a suspicion that the data is guilty of committing a crime.
 It can be formulated in the following way. The person against whom the verdict has not yet entered into force is already considered guilty.
  It should be noted that based on the requirements of this principle, the notion of "accused" has been abandoned in France.
  In France, the institute of accusation underwent a fundamental change, in particular, first of all, the name of this institution was changed, which is now called not to "accuse", but to "investigate".
  Then, instead of the accused, a new subject appears - a person under investigation3.
As we have mentioned, we are in favor of the existence of such an institution, but we suggest that the notion of "accused" be replaced by the term "prosecuted person" in the Draft, as in the Draft criminal 1 See "RA Court of Cassation A. In Papyan's case in 2010 The decision TD / 0115/01/09 made on November 5 ".
2 See Strogovich M., p. 31.
3 See Gutsenko K., Golovko L., Filimonov B., The Process of Western Governments, Moscow, 2002, p. 350.
prosecution և the decision to involve the person as an accused will be identified.
When making a decision to involve a person as an accused, it is necessary to pay attention to the individualization of the accusation.
  In this connection, cr. trial Part 4 of Article 202 of the Code stipulates the following: if a person is involved as an accused for several crimes qualified by different articles, parts or points of the Criminal Code, the descriptive-causal part of the decision states that specific crimes were committed, and the final part: the articles, parts or points of the article envisaging responsibility for those crimes.
In practice, cases are not excluded when, as soon as circumstances arising from the accusation, the legal qualification of the act, the discovery of new episodes of the criminal activity or the emergence of circumstances excluding the possible participation of a person in this or that episode appear, it is necessary to change or supplement the accusation.
 The law stipulates that if during the preliminary investigation there is a need to change or supplement the accusation, the investigator is obliged to bring the accusation again, preserving the involvement of the person as an accused; the requirements defined by the relevant articles of the Judicial Code (Criminal Procedure Code, Article 204, part 1).
 Interpreting the above-mentioned wording of the law, it can be concluded that in any case when the change of charge is conditioned by a change in the factual side of the charge or legal qualification, and the completion of the charge by revealing the criminal activities of the accused, the investigator must make a reasoned decision to involve the accused. present all the episodes and facts of the criminal activity of the accused, with their previous presentation, present that decision to the person, interrogate him with a new accusation1.
  This issue gets a different settlement in case some of the accusations made during the preliminary investigation are not confirmed.
  In this case, the investigator eliminates this part of the accusation made by his decision and announces about it to the accused (Criminal Procedure Code, Article 204, part 2).
We also emphasize the fact that from the moment of initiating criminal prosecution in the draft, a certain envisaged period begins to run, which cannot last more than: 1. two months for a felony, 2. four months for a felony, 3. eight months for a felony, 4. ten months for a felony.
The envisaged terms may be submitted by the superior prosecutor for a maximum of two months, when required by the interests of justice.
1 See “RA Criminal Proceedings.
 Special part ", page 96.
Emma Avagyan THE IMPORTANCE OF THE INVOLVEMENT OF THE PERSON AS AN ACCUSED, GROUNDS AND PROCEDURE
