ECOLOGICAL PROBLEMS OF WOOD PRODUCTION AND APPLICATION Charcoal is a material rich in solid, porous carbon obtained from dry distillation of wood at 450-550 ° С.
  Charcoal is obtained by heating wood in a wood-burning stove or in a wood pile without the presence of an air vent.
 In fact, when charcoal is obtained, wood is pyrolyzed without heat ingress or dry distillation.
Charcoal is obtained in heaps, pits, bonfires and barrels.
  In order to obtain coal in a heap method, a flat area is preferred, while the one-meter-long pieces of wood are arranged 2-4 m in diameter, 1-2 m high in a heap's egg, after which the top is covered with a 10-20 cm layer of soil and burned.
 The pit method of obtaining charcoal is similar to the pile method, with the difference that the wood is arranged in a hole and covered with a layer of soil from above.
  A suitable place is chosen by bonfire method, և a bonfire is lit with crushed wood.
 The barrel method is done in two ways [1-6].
 In the first one is used, and in the second - two barrels.
  The crushed wood of appropriate size is placed in an airtight barrel.
  Wood is arranged around the barrel, the fire is lit.
 In the second method they take big և small iron barrels.
  A 50 cm wide և 30 cm high crack opens in the side of the big barrel.
  Small holes open in the small barrel.
  In a hermetic small cabinet, crushed wood of appropriate size is arranged.
  The small box is put in a big barrel.
 The fire burns from under the big barrel for about 9 hours.
The process of decaying wood is very complicated, as it consists of a number of chemical substances.
 Dry wood contains cellulose, lignin, hemocellulose, resins, essential oils, which make up about 90-95% of dry wood, and a number of inorganic substances.
  Depending on the type of wood, 1 m 3 of dry wood produces 0.13–0.25 m 3 of charcoal.
In order to produce charcoal from wood, it must go through three stages of thermal decomposition.
  The first stage is the process of drying wood.
  At a temperature of և 150 oC, the moisture leaves the wood.
 In the second stage, a dry distillation process takes place.
  At 150-350 oC a number of organic gases are released.
  Thus, at a temperature of 150 oC, the decomposition of xylene begins and ends at 250 oC, acetic acid, furfurol and other gases are released.
  Decomposition of eligin begins at 200 oC, which is accompanied by the release of volatile low molecular weight substances, mainly the release of a first-class stable organic contaminant, benzapirene.
  Decomposition of cellulose begins at 300 oC, methyl alcohol, acetone, etc. are released.
  Starting at 280 oC, the process becomes thermal, և pyrolysis accelerates.
  Coal is mainly produced at this stage.
  In the third stage (350–550 oC) the resinous materials are mainly separated [3, 5].
It follows from the above that the atmosphere when receiving charcoal is polluted with benzopyrene, acetic acid, methanol, acetone and furfurol.
Nowadays the demand for coal has increased significantly, so it is produced by many.
  Has been engaged in the sale of activated charcoal production and charcoal in Armenia since 2012. Founded "Armount Carbon" Limited Liability Company.
  The list of products offered by the organization includes: Diablo, EcoSystems, activated hookah coal.
There are coal factories in Azatamut, Vazashen, Skar and Kirants villages of Tavush region.
  Azatamut village of Ijjan region used to have the status of an urban settlement.
  Numerous cliffs rise along the banks of the Aghst River, reminiscent of the 19th-century Alaverdi copper smelter.
  They "erupt" with smoke, poisoning both the environment and the workers working there.
Charcoal has a large porosity, which determines its high absorption properties.
 The specific area of ​​one gram of charcoal is 160-400 m2.
  Specific density: 0.2-03 g / cm3.
  The calorific value of charcoal is 7500-8200 kcal / kg.
 The humidity of charcoal is 2-4%.
 After storage it can grow up to 7-15%.
 The porosity should not exceed 3%, and volatile compounds - 20%.
There are volatile and non-volatile compounds of carbon in charcoal.
Non-volatile compounds are aliphatic-aromatic compounds containing carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and oxygen, the chemical composition of which is given in Table 1.
  Coal contains Na-K, Na, Ca, Mg, Si, Al, Fe-oxides և carbonates [4, 6].
Table Chemical composition of charcoal obtained at 1.450oC. Element Composition:% Charcoal has paramagnetic properties due to stable high molecular weight macro-radicals.
  Active - Rк * և less active Rcp *, the concentrations of which are maximum at the corresponding 550 և 325 ° С.
 When heat treatment of coal without air inlet at 400-900 ° C, the latter condenses due to the following reactions: R * + R *.
 – R – R The presence of macro-radicals in coal determines the latter's ability to react with oxygen.
 Thus, at 30-90 ° C, 0.5-2% of the oxygen content of the charcoal mass is chemosorbed in one hour, and 0.3-1.5% of water is removed at the same time.
 In the presence of oxygen, a branched chain auto-oxidation process takes place, which can lead to self-combustion of carbon.
Coal is used in the production of crystalline silicon, carbon disulfide, non-ferrous metals, activated carbon, as well as in the restaurant business as a household fuel.
For example, charcoal was used to make copper.
After heating 10 g of copper oxide to 100 ° C, add 1 g of crushed charcoal and heat it in a frying pan.
Charcoal is used as fuel և food coloring with code E153.
  It is added to animal feed.
  It also uses charcoal to clean ethanol.
The adsorption property of charcoal is often used as a means of eliminating unpleasant odors.
  Thus, if you have to turn off the refrigerator for a long time or put spicy food in the refrigerator, the smell of which spreads quickly, you can just put a piece of charcoal.
  In the same way, the unpleasant smell of the car interior is eliminated.
Thus, it has been shown that during the production of charcoal, the atmosphere is polluted with benzopyrene, acetic acid, methanol, acetone and furfurol.
  The ecological problems of charcoal use have been identified, which are especially relevant in terms of global climate change, atmospheric smog, and precipitation pollution.
LiteratureMane Musheghyan ECOLOGICAL PROBLEMS OF THE PRODUCTION AND APPLICATION OF LIGHTNING Keywords: charcoal, ecology, air pollution, adsorption.
