THE ART OF WORD EXPRESSION In the epic "SASNA TSRER" In order to understand the narrative phenomenon, it is necessary to clarify the peculiarities of the art of speech, to form a clear idea of ​​how the narrators manage to master the novel orally, to convey it.
 The answers to these questions are thoroughly given by A. In The Lord Who Says, based on research by the author and his teacher, Parry.
 Having studied the art of Yugoslav folk singers for years, they have made weighty generalizations, clarified the peculiarities of the art of singers as a result of live communication with the singers, and inquired about their functions.
Thus, A. The Lord writes that in order to form a correct idea of ​​the speaker, it must first be borne in mind that the oral work is not created, then performed, but is created during the performance. "The one who says the epic is the creator of the epic.
 From different points of view, the same person is at the same time a singer, a performer and a speaker, a poet.
 The singing, the performance, the "construction" are different aspects of the same event "1.
  In that case, what is the reason for the tradition of the epic, if it is created at the moment of performance?
  It is true that each narrator creates his own story on the basis of a certain material, which contains the main content of the work, various traditional elements, as well as the skills of the previous narrator, the peculiarities of his narration.
The material on which the narrator reconstructs the novel is a complete system of stable formulaic structures.
  If we remove the unresolved parts of the folklore text, leaving only the formulaic ones, we will notice that the latter form the framework of the work.
  In other words, it was with the help of those hardened, ossified elements that the oral novel was "recreated" and presented to the audience at the same time.
  It is due to the formulaic-schematic elements that it was possible to remember the oral epic, to preserve it, to pass it on to the generations in a relatively stable and unchanging way.
The folklore text has such features that the word created and presented orally can be easily distinguished from the written one.
  The main principle of differentiation is the presence of a formulated word.
By studying and defining the basics of the formula for saying a word, Lord and Parry have proved that the works narrated under the name of Homer are truly folkloric.
Based on the theory of the above-mentioned scientists, in this work we will examine the art of speech formulation in the epic "Sasna Tsrer".
Resolution structure.
  Lord and Parry define epic formulas as stable groups of words that, with the same grammatical frequency, express a corresponding meaning in a folklore work1.
The epic "Sasna Tsrer" has a free dimension, therefore the above-mentioned definition cannot work in the case of the Armenian epic.
 However, if we ignore the fact that there is no regular diagram, in "Sasna Tsrer" we can distinguish various formulaic systems, structures, schematic elements.
The volume of formulaic structures varies.
 It can range from a single line to an entire house or section.
First of all, the parts that express the main idea or idea of ​​the epic story are formulated.
  If you memorize them successfully, the narrator will easily remember all the incidents and details related to that part while writing the novel.
 For example, Kozbadin's justification for women about why his taxation failed: "Janjagh lakata, what do I know? Sasman's arrows are the log. Where they strike, they make their window."
The next case of the resolution is to tell the same or similar incidents, situations in the same way or with a slight difference.
  For example, David, a villager at Thaddeus Apostolic Monastery, describes the birth of Mher Pstik's wife, saying: “Then Pstik's wife lay down and bore a child.
They came, they brought a mustache to Mher Takaver.
Vakil-vazir of the people, or: "Long live the scoundrels, Be, let's see, what should we name the boy?"
The description of Choch woman's birth almost literally coincides with the description of the epic woman's birth: "He gave, then Choch woman also lay down and gave birth to a child.
They brought furs again.
They brought Mushtulugh. Seven, seven nights later, the city went to Chraghvan. Mushtulugh dispersed. Zhoghvrtvan said, "Long live the hideouts. What should we call it?"
This phenomenon will certainly be considered in the literary two as poverty of thought and speech, uniformity of ways of expression, unnecessary repetition, in order to avoid which the author must apply the same or similar thoughts to different 2 "Sasna Tsrer", h. Part B, Yerevan, 1951, p. 264.
3 Ibid., P.
4 In the same place.
the trick of expressing it with words.
  Meanwhile, it has the opposite role and significance in folklore. It is a telling trick to remember, coordinate and reproduce the novel better.
 In addition, such a repetition gives dynamism to the oral epic, makes the speech rhythmic, contributes to the rapid development of the novel.
 Such a repetition occurs even when, before or after the expression of the hero's intention or action in his direct speech, the narrator tells it by himself, confirming and confirming the hero's word.
 Or when one of the characters transmits some information or message to another through the other, that message is sounded twice during the assignment.
In the same way, Jealousy sends the ashughs, mentioning the words with which they should praise him to David.
  These lines are repeated by the ashughs while praising David.
The passages that assume different feelings and sensations are especially formulated and poetized, increasing their emotional impact on the audience.
  The emotional parts can be sung according to the preference of the speaker: "- Poor people, stay with the dance, you have made me laugh, I will fight. Oh, you idiots, oh idiots, stay with the dance, I will go." crying »1.
As we have seen, the formulaic structure is a wonderful way for the speaker to coordinate the material and at the same time convey artistry.
  But there are formulaic structures that are created to play the role of a freshman.
  The performance of a folk song is a continuous process, moreover, each time it is recreated anew and immediately presented to the audience, which causes double difficulty for the speaker.
  He needs to pause from time to time to bring his thoughts and memory together.
 For this purpose, they create "base structures" to move from one topic or incident to another.
 Murad Hovsepyan from Ayrarat makes similar passages in his story with the following words: "May the care of God, the Creator, be great.
The epic as a whole has a stable structure and motif.
  Every time he says that, he reconstructs the novel, having in mind the structure, which has the value and significance of a formula.
First, the "Sasna Tsrer" epic is divided into branches (there are four branches, but not all stories have four, there are stories with one to three branches).
 Each branch contains the story of one of the main characters.
  This story can be conventionally divided into stable, permanent themes, which have regular shifts and are found in all heroic novels.1 "Sasna Tsrer", vol. G, Yerevan, 1979, page 40.
2 "Sasna Tsrer", vol. B, part B, page 272.
1) each branch begins with the birth of the hero, 2) the hero's adventures are presented in the form of trials, they end with the victory over the enemy, 3) the themes of the hero's marriage and procreation, 4) the branch ends with the hero's death.
 "Sasna Tsrer" was divided into topics by A. Sahakyan in his "Examination of the stories of" Sasna Tsrer "1".
One of the peculiarities of the orally created novel is that there are regular incidents and motives in it (A. Sahakyan and H. Hambardzumyan 2 classified the epic motif system), which are repeated in similar circumstances.
  That is, they make the course of the novel somewhat presumptive ընդհանուր, in general, facilitate the narrator's work.
  For example, before a fateful battle or when the hero is in danger, the motive of his relative to find out about it through a dream and get heroin help.
 When David's life is in danger, Dzenov Ohan dreams (in some stories he is also Uncle Toros), and when Sanasar gets into trouble, Baghdasar either dreams about it or predicts the danger through a ring.
  Through a dream, Melik's mother foretells her son's failure.
There are motives that, in essence, are the same or similar in terms of expression.
  Such are, for example, the motives of the heroes to acquire the weapon and armor, to mobilize the enemy, to rebuild the monastery, to prepare for battle.
 The enumerated ones mainly get the formula sale by repeating և enumerating the corresponding realities.
The motive of the "triple action" is typical of "Sasna Tsrer".
  The course of the novel mainly develops when the key actions are repeated three times.
 For example, heroes go through trials to capture their brides.
 The test mainly consists of three stages.
 In order to reach Khandut Khatun, David fights against the Pahlans, then the enemies of the girl's father or Khandut's fiancé և at the end in a fight with Khandut.
  In the same way, Sanasar, at the request of his bride's father, lowers the apple from the tower, kills the girl's fiancés գնում to stop the fight against the dragon.
Those who say do not generally violate the regularity of the triple action.
 In one of the legends, Baghdasar goes to take the Forty People at the command of the king, gives Pahlan to the ground, then kills Aslan and Ghaplan.
  After these two trials, he takes the girl and comes to Sassoun.
But the king's other daughter, Peach, cuts them off and forbids them to take the Forty.
  It is true that Sanasar fights with Deghdzun and defeats him, but, in fact, that fight was the third ordeal for Baghdasar's bride, the absence of which would make Baghdasar's victory imperfect.
 In other words, the philologist completes it in one way or another, tries 1 See Sahakyan A., Examination of the stories of "Sasna Tsrer", Yerevan, 1975, pp. 82-173.
2 See H. Hambardzumyan, Typological groups of "Sasna Tsrer" stories and their features (abstract), Yerevan, 2008.
3 See "Sasna Tsrer", vol. B, part B, pp. 242-246.
to maintain the order of three-time action, otherwise, according to the popular notion, the hero's action will have no moral justification.
  Being one of the basic tricks of folklore, the motive of three-dimensional action has become so familiar to the novel that the three repetitions of actions often become an end in themselves, mechanically.
  For example, in the story of AllDavtyan, when the angel Gabriel comes to Mher at night, the latter hears a noise, asks twice who he is, but gets an answer only when he asks for the third time1.
  In such cases, the formulaic nature of the triple action is more obvious.
The point is that the triple action is also the indirect realization of the three numbers in the novel.
  This number has a religious meaning. symbolizes the divine trinity.
  Therefore, according to the popular notion that any intention or action may fail, remain imperfect during the first or second time, but the third time, because it is associated with a divine number, is blessed and must be crowned with success.
Symbolic numbers are also found many times in the novel.
  Thus, when Sanasar և Baghdasar's mother is nine months pregnant, the ninth day of the pregnancy, the couples are born, the role of the haram is forty, their theft is forty. It is three hundred and thirty-six liters or forty gallons.
 In general, all folklore genres are characterized by the presence of symbolic numbers, so in the case of a folk song they are perceived as traditional elements.
Among the traditional stable components of the novel are the names of geographical locations, weapons and military equipment.
 It is difficult to imagine the heroic novel without the description of various weapons and military items, that is, their existence comes from the inner essence and content of the novel.
 Therefore, these names are even depicted. They come with descriptive words, such as Tur Ketsak or Ketsake Tur, Topuz Bogbadin, Shapik Zrikhli, Jizma (shoes) Kusuli, Kamar in the back or Kamar Uzin, etc.
  The presence of many place names in the story testifies to the experience of the speaker, good memory.
  In the stories written in the late period, where there is a problem of memorization, a sharp decrease in the number of place names is noticeable.
  This speaks about the passive reproduction of the material by the speakers.
  However, there are a number of toponyms, which are inevitably connected with the course of the novel, have been arbitrarily merged with it and stabilized, that they have acquired a symbolic-formulaic meaning, they are found in all the stories.
 These are: Sasun, Sasna Fortress, Msr, Maruta Bardzr Astvatsatsin Monastery, Tsovasar, Seghanasar, Chapaghjur, Mount S, Batmana Bridge, Vorsasar, Surb Karapetivank և other places2.
Resolution methods.
  A. In his book The Sayer, the Lord distinguishes three main ways of creating syllables: grammatical (metric), grammatical (syntactic), and acoustic3.
  They are metrological, dwelling 1 "Sasna Tsrer", h. B, part B, page 357.
2 See Abeghyan M., Works, vol. A, Yerevan, 1966, pp. 332-353.
3 See Lord A., The Storyteller, pp. 42-59.
Of course, the structures with a certain size and rhyme, which do not make up a large number in the "Sasna Tsrer" epic, but the existing ones, being more impressive than the unmeasured parts, were easily preserved by the novelists and transmitted almost in the same way: "Erkan agha, standing short, When you go to Sassoun, they will bring oxen to Mughal, we will build them all in the spring and dry them ”1.
Grammar is built on the lexical features of words, different relations of sentence members.
  The most common model of formulas formulated in this way is the following. In all the lines the speaker repeats the same sentence, changing the member holding the same position in each one.
  In this way he focuses on the changing member, emphasizing his meaning.
  In other words, the changing member becomes the starting point of the word: "Forty years, we brought forty months. Forty months, we brought forty months. Forty years, we brought forty hours.
The accumulation of words that indicate action ("he drove, he went, he reached the goal", "he gathered, he brought, he filled", "they tie, they carry, they put") stand out, due to which the novel seems to be in constant motion.
 Sasna heroes have a tendency to react and act immediately.
  The dynamism of the novel stems from the relaxed and unobtrusive behavior of the crooked heroes.
  A. Yeghiazaryan notes that the motto of the heroes of Sassoun is the mentality "oh my god's kita, oh my opponent". "This is the formula for the determination of Sasna heroes!"
The whole life of epic heroes is a shift of such actions.
  It is their essence.
 This is a philosophy of "living" ... Every feeling of the hero, every movement of the soul immediately becomes an external movement, action, action "3.
Voice resolution is a rhetorical trick to create the appropriate mood, musicality and rhythm of speech through the sounds and consonants.
  The most common example of the consonant in "Sasna Tsrer", which is found in almost all stories, is the part of the name of Sasnaberd with the accumulation of the consonant "s": "He will say: Boy, edi is in sasu, sasu, It is not a stone, saso Who ... One day he says in Sassoon, Sanasar says: "Dear Hayrig, it was named Sassoon."
Finally, the name of the fortress will be Sassoun, Yes, Sassoun, Sassoun! ”4.
1 "Sasna Tsrer. Selected stories ", Yerevan, 2008, page 29.
2 "Sasna Tsrer", vol. A, page 549.
3 Yeghiazaryan A., The poetics of Sasna Tsrer epic, Yerevan, 2013, pp. 86-87.
4 "Sasna Tsrer", vol. D, Yerevan, 1999, p. 328.
A word constructed in this way is fragrant, regardless of its content, for an appetizing listener.
  He does not even feel how the speaker attracts his attention with a sound effect.
Means of representation - means of resolution.
  The means of representation in "Sasna Tsrer" were studied by M. Abeghyan և A. Yeghiazaryan 1.
They referred in detail to the main means of depicting speech in the epic (repetition, comparison, comparison), gave a general description of its depiction system.
 Even with the naked eye one can notice that the novel is not rich in means of imagery.
  However, we will consider them as unique means of word resolution.
Repetition is the basic means of word resolution.
  Each repetition (each word unit can be repeated, from a sound or a word to a complete paragraph) is itself a formula.
  The reciter facilitates the rhyme of the verses through repetition.
  Especially in case of the final repetition of the same line, the mechanical rhyme of the adjacent lines is obtained. "Hey Merik, what am I going to do, Tay Merik, where am I going to buy Behbahr from the city of Sasma?"
Sasna stories written in the late period do not stand out with their multi-artistic words. Formal expressions are rare.
Some stories in "Sasna Tsrer" volume D are very small.
 They can even be considered remnants of a multifaceted novel.
 The story of JE, narrated by Khazal Tonoyan, includes only the branch of David, and that is short.
 The point is that Khazal is not a master novelist. he has simply heard the novel many times by a master novelist with four branches.
  It is noticeable that in the novel, however, you tried to make the word interesting for the listeners, starting the next sentence with the word or phrase with which the previous one ended: “G'eli and Gert.
G'el Gert, day by day g size. Zzerg gzgareg kote with gold jump Gizarge ndur klokh, day sit gichape.
Adunq Gertan.
On that day they will go, Khybar will reach Msra Melik ”3.
It is true that the comparisons are not large, but it should be noted that certain well-known formulaic structures are composed entirely by comparison, such as the praise of Khandut ("My red Khandut, what a day of misery."
  / My snotty jealousy, what day is the moon on the fifteenth 4 »4, the mockery of Kozbadin or Kholbashun ("Dear Kholbash, Kholbash. / Ida dien gatsirqnts gel beast, / En dien ekn ken shun vazan. / Mzraghd vizd zn shankharan, / Berand a knats pytshan…" 5.
1 See Abeghyan M., h. A, pp. 474, 475, Yeghiazaryan A., pp. 275-294.
2 "Sasna Tsrer. Selected Stories, ”p. 410.
3 Ibid., P.
4 Ibid., P. 200.
5 Ibid., P.
The number of stable stalks is limited (fragrant ryegrass, forty gas stalks, deep arrow and bow, bitter hell, Kozbadin's great Jail).
  They are mostly in the form of hero nicknames.
  Dagalis from the preferences of the villagers. They generally like to give nicknames to both real people and their heroes.
  As we have already mentioned, the names of weapons and armor and military equipment also come with stable accents.
The epic nickname can indicate the place of origin of the hero, for example, Ilya Muromets (Muromtsi), Sadko Novgradtsi.
 The main hero of "Sasna Tsrer" is called David of Sasun, and the main enemy is Msra Melik.
  The nicknames show that the heroes oppose each other first of all by nationality.
In world epics, the most common suffixes of descent origin are formed by adding surname suffixes to the names of the heroes' clans or paternal names, that is, these suffixes appear as surnames (for example, Ajax Telamonian, Achilles of Pelissad, Pilis, Nicias Pilis Sopman Pilot).
However, such adverbs are not found in the Armenian epic.
In "Sasna Tsrer" the nicknames were mainly formed on some individual feature of the hero.
 There are nicknames that indicate external features, such as Tukhmorus Davit, Tarlan Davit, Karsun Jyugh Zham Deghdzun, Tsour, Dzenov Hovan, Uncle Toros, referring to the character traits.
 And, for example, the nicknames of Khadut Khatun or Mr. Astghik, as such, do not have the meaning of a nickname, nor are they figurative determinants, but gestures that indicate gender.
 But, since they are always repeated with the names of the heroes, they got the value of a nickname and a stable suffix.
 And so many nicknames: Big Mher, Little Mher, Boy David, Girl Khandut և etc.
The traits that become nicknames must be substantiated in one way or another, manifested in the behavior of the heroes.
 For example, in the novel, the loud voice of Dzenov Hovan is revealed in the episodes of calling masters for the reconstruction of the monastery and voting for David, who was in the well.
The origin of some nicknames (for example, David Tlor աղ Turnip Eater) in the novel is given by chance.
  It is difficult to say, as a result of the incident, the nickname came up, that it existed before, and then the people made a fuss about it.
  In any case, folk etymology is based on the imagination of the people.
 However, there are examples in which it is obvious that the narrator has tried to connect the origin of the hero's nickname with some story.
 For example, in the story of narrator Manuk Toroyan, Khor Manuk is credited with the incident of David trying with gold and fire, with which the narrator tried to verify the origin of the nickname "Deep".
Krag was sticking to his finger, Idor's snout was burning.
Etech remained the name of Khor Manuk idor »1.
1 "Sasna Tsrer. Selected Stories, ”p. 166.
By other means, some formulaic structures are found in the epic, but do not constitute a separate quality for reference.
Thus, verbal formulation is the main principle of narrative rhetoric.
  The formulaic system of the epic is an indicator of its artisticness.
  The epic "Sasna Tsrer", as it is said in a free verse, but as we have seen, has an internal system, a text full of stable formulaic structures.
Anna Mikoyan THE ART OF WORD RESOLUTION "SASNA TSRER" EPIC Keywords: Formal structure, narrator, folklore, epic, stable adverb, motive of triple action.
