ASIA-PACIFIC ECONOMIC COOPERATION ACTIVITIES FEATURES AND PLACE FROM LARGE INTERNATIONAL TO INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
  As the name suggests, the CSTO operates in international economic relations, in the Asia-Pacific region, which is gaining more and more importance in world trade, stretching from the eastern part of Russia to Australia, from China to Canada and Latin America.
The members of the CSTO are states with significant weight in the international economic system.
 40% of the world's population - about 2.7 billion people - live in the member economies of the CSTO, 44% of world trade 1.
 The GDP of these countries has doubled since the establishment of the organization.
 Russia is the largest country in the world in terms of energy resources, production and exports - the Russian Federation, the largest population in the world - the most dynamically developing country - China (PRC), the world's largest economic powers, including the United States - Japan 2.
The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Organization was established in 1989. Initiated by Australia.
  Its first members were 6 developed countries (Australia, Canada, New Zealand, USA, South Korea, Japan) and the 6 developing countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) (Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Philippines).
 They were later joined by Hong Kong, China և Taiwan (Chinese Taipei) in 1993, Mexico և Papua New Guinea in 1994, Chile in 1995, the Russian Federation, Vietnam and Peru in 1998.
  In fact, the CSTO currently has 21 members, but their number may increase in the future, as a number of countries in South, South-East, East Asia, as well as Latin America, including India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, have already expressed interest in joining. Cambodia, Macao, Mongolia, Guatemala, Colombia, Panama, Costa Rica և Ecuador3.
1 Achievemnts and Benefits, Official web-page of APEC, http:
//www.apec.org/About-Us/About-APEC/Achievements3 Ibid., pp. 2-3.
Prior to the establishment of the CSTO, a number of attempts had already been made in the region to establish economic cooperation structures, which were mainly of a non-governmental nature.
  Only with the establishment of the CSTO was the comprehensive, comprehensive economic cooperation between the countries of the region at the official state level made possible.
The FTA has three pillars: trade liberalization, investment facilitation, economic and technical cooperation.
 The most important of them is the first one, which is reflected in the trade liberalization program.
 It was fixed in 1994. The declaration adopted within the framework of the CSTO summit in Bogor, Indonesia, envisages the creation of a "free trade zone" in the region by 2010. developed countries և until 2020 for developing countries 1.
 This program is known as Bogorian Goals.
 1995 During the summit in Osaka, Japan, the 15 main areas where member economies need to make changes to achieve the Bogoryan goals were identified.
Thus, the members of the UN Security Council adopted the Osaka Action Plan.
The CSTO was established and functions as a non-political forum, the main purpose of which is to promote "sustainable economic growth and prosperity" in the countries of the region2.
  This is evidenced by the fact that the members of the CSTO are not officially called member states or member states, as is the case with members of other international intergovernmental organizations, but member economies.
  The CSTO members are guided by a principle widely used in the Asia-Pacific region: political differences should not hinder the development of normal inter-economic relations between states.
Its composition speaks about the economic nature of the organization.
  Countries such as the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China (Taiwan) have the opportunity to cooperate with each other economically here.
  A separate member of the organization is also Hong Kong (Xianggang), a special administrative district that is part of the PRC.
The fact that the annual informal summits are mainly held in cities that are in the territory of the presiding country of the organization, but are not its capital, testifies to the fact that it is a depoliticized mechanism of economic cooperation as much as possible.
 Of the 23 summits held to date, 14 have not been held in the capitals, including the last 5 consecutive meetings (2010: Yokohama, Japan, 2011: Honolulu, USA, 2012: Vladivostok, Russia, 2013: Bali, Indonesia, 2014 (Nanpo, China).
The difference in the level of development of member economies can be distinguished from the peculiarities of the FTA as an international economic organization.
 This organization unites both a number of new industrialized countries and 2 already Mission Statements, Official web-page of APEC, http.
//www.apec.org/About-Us/About-APEC/Mission-State giants or emerging economies.
 In the conditions of this variegated composition, more formal mechanisms have been created during the formation of the organization than, for example, in the case of regional integration organizations such as the European Union, MERCOSUR or NAFTA1.
  From the beginning, the CSTO was formed as a free consultative forum, without a rigid organizational structure, a large bureaucratic apparatus.
The main permanent structure was established in 1993. is a secretariat based in Singapore.
  And although the activities of the CSTO are carried out mainly on the basis of informal mechanisms, the dynamic development of the organization2.
Another feature of the CSTO is the ongoing dialogue between the անդամ businessmen և authorities of the member economies3.
  This is a necessary precondition for the second fundamental development of the organization, that is, to promote the facilitation of entrepreneurship.
In geopolitical terms, the main feature of the CSTO is the presence of traditional competitors in one organization.
  On the one hand, there is the United States with its allies, among which the countries of the region include Japan, Australia, the Philippines, Thailand, on the other hand, the traditional US rivals in the region, Russia and China.
 If the creation of another world organization, the European Union, the economic community that preceded it, is based on the cooperation between the two most powerful countries in the region, France and Germany, the efforts of these two countries for European economic development, then it is difficult to find such a consensus.
As an economic entity, the CIS works closely with the World Trade Organization (WTO).
 It refers first of all to the steps aimed at the liberalization of the priority.
 The UNHCR has set itself the task of liberalization in the form of the Bogoryan goals, but has not created mechanisms to make it a reality.
 On the other hand, the WTO has such mechanisms: it develops the liberalization processes, makes them more practical.
 The CSTO members have already demonstrated that they are incapable of developing mechanisms for voluntary liberalization;
The WTO will never be able to play the role that the WTO plays in international economic relations, because it was not created for that.
The CSTO is not endowed with binding powers to resolve conflicts (unlike the WTO).
 It works only on the basis of consultations հաստատ consensus building5.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Mizerovska-U., Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation.
  Сведения о INTERNATIONAL FORUM, http:
//geo.1september.ru/view_article.php?id=200203204. 4 Australian APEC Study Center Issues Paper 15.
 The importance of the WTO negotiations to APEC and Australia'srelated national interests, http.
//www.apec.org.au/docs/iss15.htm. The WTO և WTO has made trade liberalization one of its main goals.
  However, this is not the only factor uniting the two organizations.
  It is noteworthy that both the CSTO and the World Trade Organization have become a permanent platform for discussing Sino-US economic disputes.
 Relations between China and the United States within the framework of the UNHCR were especially strained in 2011. During the regular summit of the heads of the CSTO member states held in Hawaii on November 12-13.
  On the eve of the summit, the Chinese government protested against the US policy in the region, in particular the Trans-Pacific Partnership initiative, which was to be negotiated during a meeting between a number of CSTO countries, but China was not offered to join it1.
 It should be noted that the Trans-Pacific Partnership is included in 2011. Is one of the most important parts of the new US long-distance strategy.
  It appeared in 2006. As a result of the free trade agreement reached in Brunei, New Zealand, Singapore and Chile, and in 2009 The United States has expressed a desire to join this new structure.
 Other countries in the region, including the United States' main allies, have also expressed their intention to become members2.
The competition between China and the United States is growing.
 Each of the two powers seeks to prevent the other from consolidating its position in regional organizations by blocking the adversary's access to potential allies3.
 The United States seeks to counterbalance China through its Trans-Pacific Partnership, which participates in regional integration processes through mechanisms such as ASEAN +1, ASEAN +3, ASEAN +6, while the US participates in ASEAN. + 6.
  The United States views the Trans-Pacific Partnership as the economic basis for a new regional union between East Asia and the west coast of the Americas4.
The tense situation in the Sino-American relations became more tense in 2011. After the start of the UNHCR summit.
 The US President threatened the Chinese side that it would impose economic sanctions on China if it did not finally start "playing by the rules" 5.
 The main reason for such a tough stance was the US concern over China's growing economy.
  Nevertheless, the desire to re-elect Obama in the upcoming presidential election played a big role. Obama's opponents accused him of pursuing a very lenient policy towards China6.
http:
//online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204554204577023460833102898.html. 2 Depillis L., Everything you need to know about the Trans Pacific Partnership, December 11, 2013, http.
//www.wa4 In the same place.
5 “Growing tensions over trade agendas at APEC summit”, November 13, 2011, France 24, http.
//www.fran6 In the same place.
The Russian Federation, which fought for many years after the collapse of the Soviet Union to become a member of the UNHCR, also plays a big role in the USSR with the PRC. Russia became a member of the organization only in 1998.
One of the main reasons for such a delay was the political dispute with Japan, a founding member of the CSTO, over territorial disputes over the Kuril Islands.
In the early days of the CSTO, the Russian Federation played a very passive role in the processes taking place within the organization, but today it is one of the leaders of the organization.
 Membership in the CSTO is extremely favorable for Russia.
 The world's largest country uses its membership in this organization to actively involve the potential of its Siberian Far East in the mechanisms of economic integration in the CIS2.
2012 was a crucial moment for Russia, when Russia presided over the CSTO, especially in 2012. The meeting in Vladivostok.
 It signaled Russia's political and economic activation in the Far East.
 One of the reasons for such a change in the foreign policy course is the freezing of relations between Russia and the European Union3.
 The importance of the Vladivostok Summit for Russia is evidenced by the fact that the preparation costs amounted to more than $ 20 billion4, which was unprecedented in the history of the CSTO summits.
Russian-Chinese rapprochement was obvious during the summit.
  The two powers have clearly sought, and continue to seek, to play a decisive role in the region, to prevent the United States from establishing sole sovereignty in the Asia-Pacific region.
 The friendly relations between Russia and China within the framework of the UN Security Council are conditioned in particular by the fact that the United States, another major member of the organization, seeks to unite some members of the organization within the framework of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which the two powers fight together.
The Customs Union has a special place in Russia's relations with the CSTO.
  Following the ideas of Eurasianism, the Russian Federation is trying to play the role of mediator between the EU and Asia.
  Today there is talk that the Customs Union can play the role of a bridge between the Asia-Pacific region, ie mainly between the member states of the CSTO "EU".
  Still in 2012 In August, the Customs Union compared Sergei Chernishov, head of the Asia-Africa department at the Russian Ministry of Economic Development, to a similar bridge.
  During the meeting in Vladivostok on the expansion of ties between the CSTO and the Customs Union 1 Christoffersen G., APEC 2012.
 Russia State-Managed Integration into the Asia-Pacific, e-International Relations, September 18, 2012, http.
//www.e-ir.info/2012/09/18/apec-2012-russias-state-managed-integration-into-the-asia3 Richardson P., Eastern Promises.
 Russia and the 2012 APEC Summit, e-International Relations, September 8, 2012, http.
//www.e-ir.info/2012/09/08/eastern-promises-russia-and-the-2012-apec-summit/. 4 “Shuvalov.
  at the ATGS summit in Vladivostok cost $ 20.7 billion ”, 28.08.2012, http.
//www.forbes.ru/news5 “The USSR is perceived as a bridge in Europe.
  Opinion ”, 28 August 2012, http.
//www.iarex.ru/news/28632.html. Russian President Vladimir Putin spoke first.
 2013 During the regular UNHCR summit in Bali, Russian Foreign Minister S. In an article written for the forum, Lavrov noted that the rapprochement between the CSTO "Customs Union" should take place as soon as possible.
  According to Lavrov, it will be useful for both sides.
  The Russian Foreign Minister said that the Eurasian Economic Union could play a connecting role between Europe and the Asia-Pacific region.
If the Customs Union, and later the Eurasian Economic Union, really becomes such a structure as the Russian side imagines, it will greatly contribute to the formation of a stronger, more interconnected world economic system.
  However, it is still difficult to say whether the Customs Union will be able to hold such an interest in the system of international economic relations.
Thus, today the CSTO continues to be active in the system of international economic relations, to record new achievements.
  Controversies and disputes among the members of the organization do not turn this structure into a useless tool.
 The states of the region realize that today the world economic system presupposes interdependence between the economies of the states, so economic cooperation should not suffer from the existing political differences.
  Without the existence of an appropriate organization like the UNFPA, such cooperation between traditional political opponents would have been almost impossible.
Venus HovhannisyanASIA-Pacific Economic HAMAGORTSAKTSUTYANKAZMAKERPUTYAN ACTIVITIES OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND TEGHEZHAMANAKAKITS HAMAKARGUMBanali words, the Asia-Pacific economic cooperation, international economic relations, Sino-American relations, the Russian Far East policy.
