SEND THE MILITARY IN THE "ADAMBOOK" OF SYUNETS Delivered to Syunik in the 14th century. late և 15th century. He is one of the most famous Armenian figures of the first decades, whose merit is invaluable in the history of Armenian culture both in the fields of poetic art and science and art.
  However, it should be noted that we have almost no biographical information about this author, who left a rich scientific, especially artistic, heritage.
It is supposed that he was born in the 14th century. in the sixth decade վել died in 1425.
 However, as A. compiled and published the examination originals of Arakel Syunetsi's "Adambook". Madoyan notes that the material of Arakel Syunetsi's manuscripts spread all over the world has not been fully circulated yet. The great legacy left by him should be thoroughly studied1.
 Such researches will naturally contribute to the revelation of Arakel Syunetsi's biographical facts.
 Thus, there is a very important fact in the library of the Wilcomm Institute in London in 1693. In the manuscript collection, which includes the works of Arakel Syunetsi ("Praise to the Holy Mother of God և for the birth of our God Christ, Lord Arakel Vardapet" - pp. 201a 208b և "Praise to the Holy Mother of God, to the Blessed Virgin Mary »- pp. 209a-217a).
 The poet writes in a small memoir. "My speech was adapted to the birth of our God, the Savior of Christ, the Savior of Jesus, the Praise of Our Lady of the Blessed Virgin Mary, by the multi-faceted Apostle, in the Norashen Desert, by the Blessed Virgin Mary, by the Gospel of John the Baptist (14).
 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ our God, who is blessed for ever and ever.
 This fact proves that Arakel Syunetsi in 1431 He was in Noravank և in the work, therefore the date of Arakel Syunetsi's death can not be 1425, և it must be reconsidered.
Arakel Syunetsi received the highest education of the time. He studied at Tat University, becoming a teacher after the death of his uncle, Grigor Tatatsi.
 There is no cultural field where Arakel Syunetsi did not shine with serious creative and scientific works.
 He was a poet, philosopher, theologian, grammarian and pedagogue.
 Other books have been published: "Solution to the Invincible Philosopher of the Frontier of David", "Paradise Book", "Commentary on Grammar", "Constitution on the Upbringing of Newborn Women" and other books.
1 See Arakel Syunetsi, Adamgirq, work: A. Madoyan, Yerevan, 1989, pp. 3-4.
2 Nersisyan V., List in Armenian manuscript of the library of the Wilcom Institute, London, "Banber Matenadaran", 15, Yerevan, 1986, page 325 (quoted by A. Madoyan).
In Arakel Syunetsi's vast heritage, we have singled out the works of art.
  He authored lyrical, instructive and instructive poems, poems.
 In these works, the author referred to the moral and social phenomena of his time through biblical "religious themes".
The "Adamgirq" strip we have studied, with its news, beautiful և flexible language, unique style իհարկե, of course, has a central position in the literary heritage of Arakel Syunetsi.
 The author's exceptional ability to penetrate the depths of human psychology is most evident in this work.
 Considering the story of the first sin գի of the first human couple քի in the book of Genesis of the Old Testament, using theological literature տարր elements of folklore։ folklore, Arakel Syunetsi weaved the story of Adam և Eve, their inner worlds յուր, finally the tragedy.
  This book, which is known for its three editions (conventionally A, B, C), is really a masterpiece, Arakel Syunetsi's "Song of Songs", many parts of which were sung.
According to A. According to Madoyan, the best of the three mentioned versions is "Adamgirq" A, by which Arakel Syunetsi expanded the scope of relations between the genres of medieval Armenian literature.
  In this work, the author depicts the woman's shoulders from a new perspective, overcoming traditional stereotypes.
  The Eve created by him is a unique attempt to comprehensively understand the inner world of a woman1.
  "Adamgirq" is the peak of Arakel Syunetsi's artistic thought, the most beautiful song of harmonious merging of its content.
 The highness and richness of the "Book of Adam"'s vocabulary is conditioned by this high content and artistic value of the material.
In this article we have examined the new editions of Arakel Syunetsi's "Adamgirk", trying to reveal the power, flexibility and perfection of the author's vocabulary.
A. Martirosyan, in his work "Vocabulary Templates of Modern Armenian Modernities", summarizing the different understandings of modernities in linguistics, calls "newness" the new phenomena operating in the language, as well as giving new qualities to old words (1. word termination, 2. in dictionaries "hn."). Updating or moving words with another link to the term "msng." 3. 3. Conversation of words - stylistic neutral layer or vice versa), new means of word formation (1. transition from the analytical formations of the verb to the compound, 2. lexiconization, 3. reduction of the lexicon, 4 creation of a noun from a verb combination, 5. word cutting), creation of new words with word-formation templates (1. suffix, 2. word complex, 3. abbreviation),
 Thus, as L. According to Ezekyan, new formations are those word units, new words, which at this stage of language development are realized as new realities, have not yet entered the active vocabulary, have no general distribution, and in some cases have not even recorded the corresponding word of the given language.
2 See A. Martirosyan, The word-formation patterns of modern Armenian neologisms, Yerevan, 2007, pp. 37-38.
In other words, novelties are words that have not yet been assimilated into the vocabulary of the given language1.
  A separate type of new formations are verbal or individual novelties, which can also be called author new formations, because they have an individual nature, they belong only to that author.
  The mentioned words, which are created by the word-formation means available in the given language, give imagery and expressiveness to the word, of course, contributing to the enrichment of the vocabulary of the literary language.
Turning to the main examination of the author's new formations in Arakel Syunetsi's "Adamgirq" line, let us mention that we have compared the newly formed forms to "New Dictionary of the Haykazian Language", "Manual Dictionary of the Haykazian Language", H. Avetisyan, R. Ghazaryan "Newly found words in Old Armenian", L. Hovhannisyan "Grabar Dictionary. Words not proved in the New Armenian dictionary ", as he R. Ghazaryan, H. With the vocabulary of Avetisyan "Middle Armenian Dictionary" works.
 Accordingly, we must conditionally separate two groups of innovations, the first of which will be the innovations that are not proven in any of the above dictionaries, or exist only in the IAF with reference to Arakel Syunts, and in the second group are the new ones that exist only in the IAEA. According to the authors.
 The 47 new creations belonging to the first group stand out with their interesting structure and high stylistic value.
1. Adamgir 2.
 It is a noun, which is not found in an Old Armenian և Middle Armenian dictionary, it has the meaning of "a book that tells about Adam".
 If the name of the Greek hero Odysseus gives birth to the noun "odyssey", then Arakel Syunetsi creates the word "adam book", in fact, the odyssey of Adam.
2. Athenaeum (130).
 The noun has the meaning "Athenian virgin, Athenian virgin".
3. Unskilled (83).
 The adjective "indefatigable" is evidenced in the NHB, the synonym of which should be considered the beautiful new formation with "indefatigable, unspeakable, indescribable" meanings.
  It is used in the plural in "Adambook".
4. Anushali (80).
  The adjectives "sweet, tasty, fragrant, without bitterness or bitterness, broadly - good, pleasant, appetizing, honest" are given in the NHB.
  Anushali forms a synonymous series with the witnesses in the NHB.
5. Anushim (213).
  There is an identical antonym of this adjective in the NHB - oshim.
6. Other (52).
  There is only one other adjective in the NBB, meaning "different, like, different".
  The verb is newly formed with the meanings "to differentiate".
7. Gehenakur (52).
 The words gehen ("hell") և kur ("food for beasts") are found in the NHB, with the combination of which Arakel Syunetsi created the adjective gehenakur, meaning "part of hell".
1 See Ezekyan L., Stylistics of the Armenian Language, Yerevan, 2007, p. 132.
2 See Arakel of Syunik, page 13.
 In the case of other examples, we will mark the page next to the example in parentheses.
8. Darnagin (83).
 It is synonymous with the adjective "bitter" evidenced in the NHB, which means "full of bitterness".
9. Bitterness (88).
 This adjective with the roots "bitter" և "sour" does not exist in any of the Grabar և Middle Armenian երեն dictionaries.
  It has the meanings of "bitter sauce, full of bitter sauce".
10. Hard (63).
  The adjective "difficult" is given in the NHB, meaning "cruel, severe, severe, bitter, evil."
 "Dzhna" is synonymous with his newly formed egg!
11. Sniper (196).
 A. Madoyan gives to this novelty the meanings of "incomprehensible, difficult to understand" 1.
  In our opinion, it has the meanings of "uncontrollable, unexplainable".
12. Easy (165).
  The newly formed adjective is used in the book with the meanings "easily liked, attractive".
13. Seven times (77).
  The seven-fold macbay is proved in the MHB, the iskbay version is a pure novelty with the meanings of "increase seven times, make seven times".
14. Zuartagegh (216).
  This adjective has the meanings of "full of cheerful beauty, colorful, joyful."
15. Rusty (136).
 It is an adjective meaning "rusty".
16. Brilliant (14).
  The adjectives luminous և luminous are given in NHB with the meanings "shining with light or as light, luminous, radiant, bright, clean, clear, simple".
 Arakel Syunetsi enriches this synonymous series by creating a luminous version.
17. Translucent (224).
  The adjective noraban has the meanings "bright, luminous, luminous".
18. Khalbalenal (32).
  In MHB there is a verb to falsify with the meanings "to destroy, to spoil".
  The author has compiled a terrifying version of the latter.
19. Scratch (213).
  This verb means "to write with joy and happiness".
20. Xera (102).
  The chronological version with "unrestrained" and "rebellious" meanings is proved in the MHB, and the one with the suffix -in is a novelty.
21. Divide (94).
 The adjective "half-cut, shortened, imperfect" is used in the NBU.
  The meanings of the word "reduce, divide" consisting of the above adjective.
22. Sigh (86).
  The newly formed adjective in Arakel Syunetsi's "Adamgir" is used only with the accusative syllable, while sighing.
  It has the meanings of "suffering, tormenting."
23. Sigh (28).
  The Maccabean New Order has the meaning of "sigh".
24. Interrogation (219).
 This noun exists only in MHB.
 The author's testimony is Arakel Syunetsi.
  It means "question and answer".
1 See Arakel of Syunik, page 413.
25. Miraculous (58).
 It is synonymous with the wonderful adjective evidenced by the Grabar dictionaries.
26. Wonderful (25).
  NB has the adjective miraculous ("brilliant, radiant") and the noun miraculous ("wonderful radiance, radiance"), but the verb is newly formed, meaning "to shine, to shine".
27. Joyful voice (82).
  This new structure is an adjective with the meaning of "cheerful dialect".
28. Boredom Council (213).
  The new formation is not evidenced in the Grabarian furnaces.
 It has the meanings of "boring, heavy".
29. Boring (164).
 It's the same with Boredom Council.
30. Ejaculate (84).
  In the MHB, there is only the subjugating subjunctive verb with the meaning "pouring poison".
  The verb is newly formed և means "to pour poison".
31. Mannahrim (130).
  In NHB the meaning of ring finger // ring finger // ring finger is given, the meanings of "ring that bears, seal, seal ring".
 The verb means "to stamp, to seal".
32. Maranapan (108).
  The noun marnapan, which has the meaning "head of the cellar", is proved in the MHB.
33. Instructive (184).
  In the NHB it is mentioned only to give hope to the verb ("to give hope, to assure").
  The adjective is newly formed և has the meanings of "reassuring, reassuring".
34. Mourning (144).
  In the NHB there are only adjectives - polytheistic adjectives with the meaning of "begging, affectionate, persuasive".
Vogokagin completes the synonymous series.
35. Poetically (166).
  It is an adjective used in a double sense.
  It has the meanings of "poetically" և "verse with egg, not prose".
36. Charubar (95).
 This adjective, which is not found in dictionaries, has the meaning "evil in itself, bearer of good".
37. Charchar (46).
  The newly formed macabre has the meaning of "extremely evil".
It is used in the book with a plural.
38. Chknaghatsegh (216).
  The adjective noraban means "wonderful, unique."
39. Bright (81).
  The novelty is an adjective և means "wonderful".
 It is available only in MHB, with reference to Syunetsi.
40. Accompanying.
 The noun participle with the meanings "to accompany, to associate" is evidenced in the NHB.
 The people of Syunik created the latter synonymous egg - appendix.
41. The smell of copper (136).
 It is an adjective in the sense of "smelling of copper".
42. Veraburim (159).
 The new organization has the meaning of "smelling again".
43. Conclusion (159).
 It means "end", "end".
44. Torture (46).
  The synonym "tortoise" is attested in the NHB.
There are examples of "singular" and "plural" usage in the book.
45. Kaktakim (36).
 The verb kaktem is given in NHB ("kakel kakel, kandel, break, break, destroy, distort, dissolve"), kaktak // kaktel adjectives ("who can or has a kaktil, soluble, divisible as a real thing").
 Apparently, this synonym of the verb cactum from Syunik formed a root + suffix + verb ending in the form: cact + ak + im.
46. ​​Odzatip (147).
  The adjective is ambiguous.
  It means "snake-like", "snake-like".
47. Anthemologist (82).
 It is an adjective in the sense of "singing an anthem".
Let us present the list of words that are proven only in the MHB.
There are only 6 of them.
1. Saltness (36) - Noun, which has the meanings of "saltiness, unpleasantness".
2. Class (163) - Noun with the meaning "teacher".
3. Lusahosan (19) - Adjective meaning "emitting".
4. Death (200) - In the MHB it is proved only in the relation "to be dying".
 In the book it has an adjective value.
5. Bright (163) - Adjective meaning "bright-minded, genius".
6. Patutim (190) - This verb, certified in the MHB, means "to wrap".
According to this, Arakel Syunetsi used 53 new formations in the "Adamgirq" strip, after giving the general description of which we will present the conclusions we have reached.
1. In the process of word formation, the author used a series of word-formation templates, resorting to word-derivation methods.
  Abbreviated novelties are not found in the book, as the acronyms do not stand out for their stylistic value.
  The most vital of the word-formation templates is the noun + noun template, which consists of 7 words: 2 nouns (adamgirq, athenakoys), 3 adjectives (copper-smelling, ozatip, ksktsamah) և 1 macbay (sigh).
  It should be noted that the hunting template mainly comes with a noun + joint + noun participle.
  According to the viability, the next is the noun + verb // verb form, together with the noun + article + verb // verb form (two adjectives: translucent, gehenac, two nouns: classmate, maranapan, two verbs: gall, stigmatize).
  There are adjectives + articulations + verbs (cheerful, dull, bright, bright, pleasant), adjectives + articulations + nouns (4 adjectives: ungrateful, bitter, dull, mysterious, non-existent), adjective + adjective) joint + adjective (1 adjective - rusty), bayarmat + joint + noun (1 adjective - delightful) with long-stemmed patterns կ partial compositions.
 In the whole book there are only two examples of complex three-syllable neologisms, which have the templates bayarmat + noun + artakap + noun (anthem) ած adjective + chakkap + adjective (syntactic complexity: charubar).
  The word-formation new formations are stylistically more active than the suffix-formed ones, but there are a lot of suffix-formed new formations in Syunetsi.
  It should be noted that the vast majority of new formations in this way have suffixed templates.
Thus, in the "Adamgirq" line, there are 21 newly formed structures formed in the above-mentioned way (fragrant, otherwise, bitter, hard, radiant, dull, half-sighing, sighing, wonderful, miraculous, finger-pointing, hopeful, mournful, rudimentary , attach, cheat, sevenfold).
  There are only three new formations formed by the prefixed form (sweet, reluctant, fragrant).
  There are also new formations in the "Adambook", which will be compiled at the same time with "complexity" and "suffix".
  Thus, Arakel Syunetsi created 3 new formations with the root + joint + root + suffix template: the stream, the interrogation, the conclusion.
2. The vast majority of newly formed adjectives are adjectives (31).
 In terms of lexical belonging, the verb is in the second place (11), and the noun (9) is in the third place.
 Only 2 of the new formations are macabre.
3. Newly formed horses mainly have a pronounced stylistic value, that is, they convey imagery, emotion, expression, live breath, movement to the work.
Often the author uses the newly formed horse to emphasize the meaning of the synonym next to the active vocabulary of the language.
  For example, So many miracles that there were Unspeakable and sleepless… The use of the new form "Unspeakable" next to the adjective "sleepless" best shows the sleepless, unspeakable.
  Or in another case, together with the adjective "genius", Arakel Syunetsi uses the "bright" new formation.
  This invention allows the author to make a greater impression on the reader, to emphasize the importance of what is said, to intensify the meaning of the synonym of the active vocabulary.
4. Newly formed horses are used not only for stylistic purposes, but also contribute to the formation.
 Let us bring relevant examples.
My man is an image of the creatorType և such a wonderful wonder… What an awakening it was with joySweet, hymn… Juicy food was cheerfulAnd desirable not աց That your breath worked, It smells of copper, It rusts like new հաճախ It is clear accumulation-series, which not only do not confuse speech, but also make it more melodic and easier to remember.
  Let's not forget that many parts of this work have been sung.
6. Arakel Syunetsi is the greatest master of building new organizations.
 The best proof of what has been said is that the latter expressed the meanings of "boring, heavy-minded" in one case with a newly formed "boring council", in another case with "boring", creating a newly formed synonymous pair.
  We will not find any unexplained, artificial or accidental new creation in the book.
7. The author is not only the greatest master of new creations, but also the greatest lover, the bearer of the word-creation tradition of Grigor Narekatsi.
  Suffice it to say that even the title of the book is newly created - "Adamgirq".
 We can rightly consider this new organization a novelty, a new concept with a new name.
8. Arakel Syunetsi's new word formations contributed not only to the refinement and improvement of the poetic language of the time, but also to the enrichment of the general vocabulary of the literary language.
 A significant part of them is still an active part of the literary Eastern Armenian vocabulary.
Satenik Ghazaryan DELIVER THE INNOVATIONS IN SYUNETS '"ADAMBOOK" Keywords: Arakel Syunetsi, Adamgirq, new organization, novelty, vocabulary, suffix, template.
