COOPERATION INSTITUTE DRAFTING A NEW CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
 The criminal sphere has not been spared from changes.
Currently, an active process of criminal justice reforms is underway in Armenia.
  2011-2012 A draft of the Criminal Procedure Code was developed, which includes a number of fundamental innovations aimed at significantly improving the current criminal procedure system and increasing the efficiency of the administration of justice.
  Taking into account the requirements of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, the obligations undertaken internationally by the Republic of Armenia, the elaboration of the new Code of Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the draft) should be based on two basic criteria: bold innovation և moderate demand.
  First of all, it is perceived as an experimental means of ideas and institutions to be used in the next stage of the development of the RA criminal procedure legislation.
 In this regard, the development of the draft is considered as a unique stage in the normal development of the RA criminal procedure legislation, which should allow to avoid jumps, to ensure a relatively smoother transition from one system to another 1.
One of the innovations of the project is the provision of separate procedures.
  As separate types of proceedings, private prosecution proceedings, conciliation proceedings, pre-trial cooperation agreement (cooperation proceedings) are envisaged.
At present, many foreign countries have adopted the path of optimization, post-litigation criminal proceedings, which allow to reduce pre-trial proceedings, saving considerable resources.
  The simplification of the judicial process is aimed at both responding to crimes more quickly and operatively, as well as resolving cases more quickly and efficiently in the conditions of maximum economy2.
  We consider it necessary to pay special attention to the so-called "cooperation proceedings" 1 See "Concept of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code", Yerevan, 2011.
2 See Ghukasyan H., Melkonyan D., The Differentiated Trial և Its Peculiarities, "State և Law", № 1, 2007, pp. 33-34.
to the institute.
  To find out the essence of cooperation proceedings as a judicial institution, let us mention that it is classified as a separate type of proceedings.
 The draft, as a separate type of proceedings, includes proceedings on private charges, conciliation proceedings, cooperation proceedings.
 It is necessary to distinguish the cooperation proceedings from the agreement proceedings, to which we will return later.
  It should be noted that the co-operation is a simplified litigation process, the effectiveness of which is disputed by theorists.
  Some advocates of the differentiation of the trial horse have strongly criticized the idea of ​​simplifying the trial horse, considering it vulnerable in terms of revealing the truth, ensuring a full, objective, comprehensive investigation, and protecting the rights of trial participants.
According to the latter, the differentiation of the judicial horse should be aimed at complication, the provision of additional guarantees in cases of certain categories of crimes.
  On the other hand, according to some, the simplification of the judicial process is an objectively mature issue in theoretical approaches պայմանավորված due to the requirements of practice1.
  In order to reveal the essence of the cooperation proceedings, we consider it necessary to analyze its meaning հաս the terms contained in the concept.
  It is accepted in theory as a "cooperation agreement".
  Paying attention to the terminology, we see that there is a new legal process, which is called an agreement between the parties.
  The term "agreement" is used not only in the criminal sphere, but also by the branches of civil, administrative, arbitration, labor and other law, and the term "conciliation agreement" is used in civil litigation and arbitration proceedings.
  There is no specific concept, but based on the interpretations in the legal doctrine, we can say that it is an agreement of the parties, which resolves the existing dispute.
According to Shakaryan, it is a deal of reconciliation between the parties on the compromise of mutual rights and responsibilities, which, approved by the judge, resolves the existing dispute, the legal relationship.
 Thus, the term agreement means: 1. General agreement, mutual agreement, 2. Agreement, which will regulate the existing legal relationship under any conditions 2.
The theory of criminal procedure gives the concept of a preliminary cooperation agreement, which is defined as "agreement between the prosecution", where the parties agree on the terms of liability of the accused after the initiation of a criminal case or indictment.
Giving the legal definition, we see that there is an extension of the rights and responsibilities of the participants in the criminal proceedings, in particular, in the case of the prosecutor, who can make a cooperation agreement, decide on the existing mitigation opportunities 1 See Ghukasyan H., D. Melkonyan, p. 33.
2 See http.
//prokuror.spb.ru/k816.html#2.
ստեղծել Establish a new criminal justice institution, a decision on cooperation1.
In general, the cooperation agreement is as follows: the accused actively promotes the administration of justice, which expects mitigation of criminal liability.
   Recently, the co-operation agreement has been one of the most promising և controversial novels in criminal law և practice in criminal proceedings2.
 The presented agreement is widely used in the criminal practice of foreign countries, aimed at revealing cases in which the accomplices refuse to testify against each other.
 The Partnership Agreement or the so-called "Justice Deal" is applicable in medieval English law enforcement practice.
  However, it was a reprehensible act because the person was testifying against his relatives.
 It was known at that time as the "review of the sinner's case."
However, studies of the sources make it clear that the roots of this institution go back to Roman law.
  According to Tushin, simplified proceedings still derive from Roman law, citing the law of the twelve tables as an existing source3.
The institution called the Justice Deal is widespread in the United States.
  This institution is enshrined in the state legislature, otherwise known as the "plea bargain."
  About 90% of cases in the United States are committed through a guilty plea deal.
 The essence of this is that in the case of admission of guilt, the prosecutor removes a part of the accusations from the accusation or reclassifies the most severely punished crime with a milder one4.
 The deal also significantly reduces the length of the case. It is carried out in two stages, if the accused has admitted his guilt, then the indictment is presented, and a verdict is made.
  In the Anglo-American system, both the prevailing practice and the practice of law enforcement are based on the approach that criminal proceedings are disputes over the fact of a crime, in which a person is guilty; .
  This institution, typical of the Anglo-American legal system, became applicable over time by continental legal systems, in particular, cooperation proceedings are provided for in the legislation of Russia, Georgia, Moldova, France and other countries, and the study of their experience testifies to the necessity of using this institution.
  In Russia in 2009 The initiative to envisage amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code took the form of a federal law.
  The new Criminal Procedure Code provides for "Prosecution և defense parties 1 See http.
//prokuror.spb.ru/k816.html#2.
2 See ibid.
3 See Foinitsky I., Course in Basic Judicial Production, 3rd ed., SPb., 1910.
4 See Simonyan G., The Institute for Cooperation Proceedings in the Draft Criminal Code, "State և Law", № 1, 2013, p. 160.
5 See Ghukasyan H., Melkonyan D., page 34.
The so-called "pre-trial agreement", which allowed the accused to mitigate the punishment of those who had committed a crime by testifying against their accomplices.
  According to the Criminal Procedure Code of the Russian Federation, a pre-trial cooperation agreement is a transaction between "defense" parties, where the parties agree on the responsibility of the suspect or accused, due to his actions after initiating a criminal case or bringing charges1.
 Examining the concept of "Cooperation Proceedings", the opinions in the theory, using a brief reference to the historical development of this institution and the experience of foreign law, we can say that the envisage of such an institution in the draft of the new Criminal Procedure Code, which will increase the efficiency of justice.
The Code of Criminal Procedure should provide for the maximum protection of the rights, freedoms and "legitimate interests" of individuals to achieve the effective implementation of criminal proceedings2.
Examining the new draft Criminal Procedure Code, we will see that Section 15 is devoted to the specifics of conducting cross-border proceedings, ինչպես, as mentioned above, as a separate type of proceedings, the draft includes proceedings on private charges, conciliation proceedings և cooperation proceedings.
  Examining the above, we will see that there are similarities between the proceedings of coordination and cooperation և, հարցը the question arises of the need to differentiate them, as the similarities of the mentioned institutions are obvious.
Article 506 of the draft states the grounds for applying cooperation proceedings. It is noted that co-operation proceedings can be initiated only by the accused in the case of submitting a written motion to conclude a pre-trial co-operation agreement addressed to the prosecutor supervising the legality of the investigation, and the motion must be signed by the defendant or his lawyer.
 Article 499 sets out the grounds for the application of conciliation proceedings, according to which the court conducts conciliation proceedings on the basis of a motion brought by the accused for minor to medium-gravity offenses, and Article 500 states that the court upholds the conciliation motion.
  It follows from the above that in the cooperation proceedings the mediation is addressed to the prosecutor, and in the conciliation proceedings to the court.
 It should be noted that the cooperation proceedings do not specify for which crimes it is applicable, therefore it is applicable in case of submission of a cooperation agreement by a person accused of supporting minor, medium-gravity crimes and serious, especially serious crimes.
  There is also a difference between the trial stages, which is obvious.
We can mention that if the purpose of the co-operation proceedings is to obtain information about the crime from the accused, then the agreement 1 See Simonyan G., p. 162.
2 See http.
//prokuror.spb.ru/k816.html#2.
The proceedings are based on the defendant's admission of guilt1.
  The norms contain a number of guarantees for the protection of the interests of the accused.
 In particular, the petition states what the accused will cooperate in the investigation, as well as the actions that the accused undertakes to perform in order to identify, investigate, expose accomplices or assist in the discovery of property acquired through the crime.
  As a guarantee, the appointment or summoning of a lawyer by the investigator, if the accused does not have a lawyer at the time of the mediation, և provides an opportunity to discuss the motion with the lawyer.
  Upon receiving the motion, the prosecutor makes one of the following decisions: 1. on rejecting the motion to conclude a pre-trial cooperation agreement; 2. on satisfying the motion to conclude a pre-trial cooperation agreement.
A guarantee is also the possibility of appealing to the superior court in case of rejection of the petition.
 Article 509 of the draft stipulates in detail what the pre-trial cooperation agreement should include.
 Article 512 also sets out the procedure for applying a special procedure for co-operation proceedings.
  The following provision is a guarantee, according to which the trial can be held behind closed doors in order to ensure the security of the accused, his relative or other related person.
 The court, based on the examined evidence, the defendant duly observes the terms of the agreement, the fulfillment of his obligations under it, as well as the attainment of the goal of cooperation, imposes a guilty verdict on the defendant, imposing a milder sentence than the law,
It should be noted that, according to the draft, the investigator submits the motion to the prosecutor within three days of receiving the motion signed by the accused և defense counsel, attaching his / her opinion on its satisfaction or rejection2.
 In connection with this provision, we consider it necessary to compare with the RF Criminal Procedure Code, which states that the motion is submitted to the prosecutor in writing through the investigator; it must contain information about the actions that the suspect or accused undertook to investigate, identify other accomplices. նպատակով For the purpose of criminal prosecution, search of criminally acquired property.
 The mentioned agreement must be signed by the Defender.
The investigator may submit the motion to the prosecutor or make a decision to reject the motion, ie the investigator is given the right to reject the motion, which will give rise to disagreements. 1 See Simonyan G., p. 162.
2 See Draft New Criminal Procedure Code, Yerevan, 2012.
լիս 1.
 Comparing the draft with the criminal procedure legislation of the Russian Federation, we saw that there is a significant difference in the powers of the investigator. The restriction of the investigator's powers in the draft, the non-provision of such powers as mentioned in the RF Criminal Procedure Code, are justifiably. ում Conflict of investigative interests, which would lead to unfavorable consequences.
  We do not consider it necessary to single out not endowing the investigator with such powers as an advantage of the given institute of the project.
The draft states that in case of making a decision to satisfy the motion to sign a pre-trial cooperation agreement, the prosecutor shall draw up a pre-trial cooperation agreement with the participation of the investigator, the accused and his / her lawyer.
  It is not specified when the decision will be made, which may lead to the abuse of a reasonable time.
Summing up our work, we came to the following conclusions.1. The differences in the theory of criminal procedure law indicate that the above-mentioned judicial institution has a wide development perspective, which should be studied in depth.
2. Briefly studying the foreign practice, comparing them with each other, we noticed that the institute of cooperation proceedings in different countries is envisaged with certain peculiarities, which և testifies to the prospects of the development of this institute.
3. Examining the chapter of the new draft Criminal Procedure Code dedicated to cooperation proceedings, we noticed that it includes many guarantees for the protection of the rights of the accused և legal interests.
Returning to the procedure of drawing up a pre-trial cooperation agreement, it should be noted that the prosecutor, being initially aware of the circumstances of the case, already satisfying the motion of cooperation between the accused and his defense counsel, must draw up a cooperation agreement within a special period, otherwise the rights of the accused will be violated. It is also a fact of mitigation of the sentence to be applied to the accused (the defendant will have a nihilistic attitude towards the law and the actions of law enforcement agencies), because, as we know, the accused is a "vulnerable" subject in the trial.
  Commenting on the current problem from another angle, we will face the fact. Suppose there is an agreement as a result of negotiations between the prosecution and the prosecution, the prosecutor has received information about the crime, and at the same time the issue of mitigation of the sentence applied to the accused is clarified, in which case the prosecutor does not make a cooperation agreement.
  There is, in fact, a problem here, կա there is a need to specify a specific term by which the prosecutor will be constrained.
 Of course, we can not ignore the idea of ​​a time limit. 1 See Bezlepkin B., Commentary on the Code of Conduct of the RF (Post), 9th ed., Moscow, the idea of ​​a term if the prosecutor presents solid facts for not concluding the agreement within the specified period.
 Examining the current situation, we can mention that point 1 of Article 509 of the draft should be completed, getting the following final look. "In case of making a decision on satisfying the motion to sign a pre-trial cooperation agreement, the prosecutor with the participation of the investigator, the accused and his / her lawyer shall draw up a pre-trial cooperation agreement within three days, unless he / she has presented serious circumstances hindering the agreement."
Arnak Hakhverdyan COOPERATION INSTITUTE DRAFT NEW CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS Keywords: cooperation proceedings, conciliation proceedings, justice deal: plea bargain, plea bargaining
