NON-LITERARY SYNTHRIC FEATURES H. IN MATEVOSYAN'S "LORD" AND "AUTUMN SUN" NOVELS The main differences between colloquial language and literary language are manifested in the syntax, that is, in the construction of a sentence.
The most characteristic feature of the syntax of spoken language is the freedom of speech construction, which is conditioned by not being prepared for speech1.
 The words here are arranged not according to the requirements of the norm of literary language, but as dictated by the given verbal situation. Depending on which word in the given word is possible and primary, that word is also put in sentence 2.
While H. Matosyan developed our prose within the framework of regular prose.
  H. Matosyan came to give a new breath and a new spirit to the history of our literary thought, opening a new stage of prose in Armenian literature.
  He broke the canon of the plot.
  If the previous ones connected the different parts of the plot, brought to the final point, H. Matjosyan dismantles and divides the different parts of the plot.
  In other words, it is being edited.
 Naturally, his professional orientation was great in that.
 In some cases, this creative trick causes difficulties in reading, confusion of the mind, but the author responded to it by saying: "Although I have often been criticized for making my text difficult to read, for breaking through like thorny bushes, I would never want to make my text clear to everyone."
  Genre certainty is one of the criteria of a writer's mastery, but H. Matosyan deliberately undermines that certainty.
  He loses the right of the owner, or rather, that right is taken away by the "sons of the stateless dog", he spreads material-moral disasters everywhere, he remains unpunished "4.
The differentiation of the genre is largely connected with the style.
 The renewal of style poses a problem of renewal of the genre.
  This problem especially refers to the "Lord" novel.
The subjective speech of the narrator, the self-attitude towards the laws of the world, the laws of nature, the pronounced self-expression in the artistic image "the story on the one hand" bends "towards epic" 5, on the other hand the inner searches of man, deep psychological discoveries give philosophical nerve.
 The narration of the author's speech is very important for the style. 1 See "Modern Armenian Conversational Language", Yerevan, 1981, p. 103.
2 See Ezekyan L., Stylistics of the Armenian Language, Yerevan, 2003, p. 80.
3 "Matosyan Echoes", Yerevan, 2005, p. 103.
4 Aghabekyan K., Hrant Matosyan, Tsmakut's novel, Yerevan, 1988, p. 332.
5 Aghababyan S., Articles, portraits, memoirs, Yerevan, 1982, p. 267.
function in the structure.
  The story of H. is rich and diverse. Matosyan's release.
  Here the author's word is often absorbed in the words of the characters, sometimes it is difficult to distinguish where the author ends, where the hero's word begins.
H. Matosyan's "Autumn Art" revealed the image of a struggling Armenian woman, the prototype of which was absent in modern Armenian literature.
 The "Lord" is the image of mental pain and suffering, the son of the forest, the lord of that world Rostom, who contains the whole race in us.
  "The lawgivers of the country lose the right of the owner, or rather, that right is taken away by the 'sons of the stateless dog', material and moral disasters are spread everywhere and remain unpunished" 1.
H. Matosyan's contribution is great not only in the news brought in literature, but also in the development of the language of literature.
  Matosyan came to prove that the dialect can also be skillfully used together with the literary language, without spoiling any of them.
  In addition, he showed that rural life could be reproduced without paying tribute to purely dialectal colloquial words, relying mainly on grammatical structures.
H. The uniqueness of Matosyan's speech art և the uniqueness of the structure are largely conditioned by the syntactic peculiarities.
  He brought an unprecedented system of speech construction, which makes his entry into the field of prose of our literature special.
Conversational language is generally not characterized by long sentences of complex structure.
In the situations where the heroes appear in dialogues, they are mainly simple and not long sentences: "- Sero.
"I'm coming to Yerevan."
"No, Yer!"
 Lunch!
 Grind, crumble.
"I do not cry" (A 61).
But H. Matosyan also used long sentences, which are typical of colloquial language, when the hero, who has not prepared his speech in advance, speaks about something, then gives a long description so that the listener can see the situation visually: "As if we were old teenagers և In the old days, we dragged the snow-covered wolf like a young wolf to the caravan of women, our load was just a load of horses, but we dragged and drowned, the snow went and drowned, then we fell downhill, the load pressed on our heads, we could not fall under the grass. we crawled like a beast and fell again չորfoot again և we fell again ը the load overcame us, now we did not even move, the load was motionless,
Conversational style is characterized by sentences with discounted members. Different members of the sentence can be discounted, thus, the subject is discounted: "- You say and do not do, I?
"Didn't I come that time?" (A 49).
1 Aghabekyan K., page 332.
The following: "- Who ate mulberries, then ate cucumbers, and then swelled?"
"The Elder of Georgia" (A 65).
The subordinate և footnote at the same time: "- How would I know?
"From the mind!" (A 59).
Often the dialogue is expressed in one word: "- What do they study?"
"Guard" (A 73).
The discount of any member of the sentence depends on the prior knowledge of the subject in the situation, such as: "Do they die soon?"
"They die soon, they say the cord of the heart is cut" (A 58).
We are talking about poets, who are known from the post-dialogue period of Simon Aghun.
During dialogues, the answer sentence is often expressed with the moderating word: "- Is not absorption not absorption?"
"Yer!" (A 58).
Often in colloquial language "there is no need for grammatically expressed subjugation" 1, thus, "Eat," he said,
 How much would I take, how much is less?
- Three hundred.
"How many three hundred, three thousand?"
- Three thousand".
"Sako is on the mountain, and his reward is sixty rubles."
- Six hundred.
- Six hundred".
Discounts are possible in imperative sentences "2, such as" - I am coming to Yerevan.
"No, Yer!"
 Lunch! Come soon! ”(A 61).
In this example, the footnote is discounted, but the sentence has not lost its imperative tone.
Another characteristic of dialogues is the following: when the speaker does not answer the question asked by the interlocutor, he gives another answer, from which the answer to the question is presumed.
"Who will keep you there?"
"In Armen's house" (A 52).
The answer given by Sero presupposes the answer to Aghun's question - Armen.
Conversational language is characterized by many unrelated sentences.
 H. In these two works of Matosyan, the subordinate links are mainly discounted.
  The most common examples are the discounts of subordinate clauses.1 "Modern Armenian colloquial language", page 105.
2 In the same place.
"You have come to laugh at our sadness" (T 422) (which).
"So you want us to look ahead now" (T 426) (which).
"We kept the horse, we waited for it to arrive" (T 477) (which).
"We did not understand what was bothering us" (T 478) (or).
"We were muttering irrelevant words, we thought we had won" (T 422) (or).
"We made a mistake, we thought he was going to sit down with the explorers to eat" (T 514) (or).
Let us now present examples of discounts on other chains: "If I were like you, my nose would not be dirty" (A 71) (if).
"Sako is on the mountain, Lusik will be at home" (A63) (and, consequently).
"Remember, ashamed, the remorseful boaster boasted of a threat (T 473) (instead).
Sometimes, repeating the interlocutor's words, the speaker puts ridicule and anger in it. Like Aghun, repeating what his son said, he gets angry at him, at the same time mocking his incomprehensibility: "Before I come to Gomer, I will go back with my father."
"Fly home as soon as possible."
 The chickens, the dog, the sheep to come out, the pig to come out, "until I come with you to Gomer" (A 77).
Unlike a pre-constructed scientific or official speech, the topic of conversation often changes to another one, which is in line with the previous logical link: "Enough, well, the oxen love each other, the dogs at the door do not bite each other."
 God made me immortal.
 I am on the road, love, and you know that your eye is heavy… Your holy book did not affect me ”(A 35).
Or, when Aghun is talking to his mother-in-law, noticing Arus approaching, he turns to Eord, "I'm going to be happy, do not blur the bright day."
  Sero, keep the dog, the owl will come ”(A 34).
H. Matgosyan constructs such situations with words, clear images are created that reach visibility.
Repetitions are common in dialogues.
  Sometimes the speaker's face is repeated, with the intention of emphasizing the person's ability and responsibility: "- I am the owner of that case and I am, that is, I am not afraid, I will put pressure on your eyes" (T 515).
The whole idea is often repeated in order to emphasize the importance of what is to be said, such as, "Did you know Elijah died? Did you know that Elijah died?" (T470).
"Նելով dying we groaning and ascending we could not, could not" (T 430).
In unprepared speech, the member of the sentence is sometimes used again.
 This often happens when the main message is interrupted by additional information, the hero repeats the word, remembering or reminding the main message.
"We have kept, we have won, he is used to my hands, he comes from the whole big valley of Sargsyan (he says he opened the whole slope of Kaputler mountain), he jumps in the big valley, comes and plays and eats a piece of our hand" (T465).
Although structures with a derivative form are not specific to the colloquial style, there are still quite a few structures with an indefinite derivation. Let us bring such examples: "We came out of the calamity, choking and choking" (T419).
"They grouped together and went back looking hostile" (T440).
"A stone flew over our heads, cracking" (T 441).
Sometimes the same sentence uses derivational phrases made up of practical clips.
  They add a colloquial tone to the word, such as: Slowly, changing his long, beautiful legs as soft as a cat, he went to the pool… ”(T 494).
The syntax in colloquial language is not regular.
  It is here that H. Matևosyan was able to arrange the members of the sentence in such a way that when reading the poem you feel the psychology of a villager who does not know the language rules speaking between the lines.
  Here are some interesting examples: "- They do not give eight years to hit a car. "Who had a daughter-child in it? How are you going to keep your family until they are released? What will they be like when they are released?" we said (T470).
"… This is the Donbass bull itself. In our time, everything that was abundant and striking was Donbas or Stakhanov… ”(T465).
"Not to mention that, we will be very upset, he is waiting under the load, go" (T 508).
In colloquial language, mistakes of agreement and request are common.
 H. Matosyan used this style of stylization, such as "The football game was over, a group of satisfied and excited guys left the club and went for a beer" (T 504).
In this example, the agreement of the subject և subordinate is violated.
 "He kicked the stones of the river and jumped like a bull" (T 499).
Here, too, the mistake is problematic.
 Spoken language is characterized by impromptu speech, when the hero does not regulate his thoughts, does not write them in order.
 Often the mind is interrupted by something else, by which the characters convey some additional information.
 The sentences of this structure are very many, especially in the "Lord" novel.
 In many cases, the author provides additional information in parentheses.
 "Our head of the forestry (we did not know that he was our head, he knew very well that we were his subjects) stood in a clean, white suit in the patterned shade of an apple tree…" (T 426).
 "… It was suggested not to lower the oak tile one by one (" Who needs a painted plate there, won't there? ") But to throw the ropes with a tractor (" Ten days' work will be done in two days "). ., Page 77.
It just explodes ("I saw it in the movie".
  "They take it in steel and heat it") (T 419).
In this series we should also present the structures typical of colloquial language, in which the utterance is interrupted by a commentary sentence: "This one threw the child and he ran away, his shout and a word" cruel ", although we closed our pair of ears with a pair of palms, we heard" (T 434).
"He went out, shook the castle, threw down his cigarette and walked, although there was nothing fire-fighting there, trampled it and entered the yard behind us" (T 471).
"Your father, although he never took a drum in his hand or a zurna in his mouth, was among us" (T 458).
The result of an unprepared speech is the intermediate use of secondary sentences: "the beginning of another thought that has not finished one thought" 1.
This phenomenon is specific to the literary language, but H. Matjosyan interrupts the main sentence from such a place, starting the secondary one, that creates the quality of an indirect, unprepared speech, such as "We went out with a sigh and choked, about the horse that looked at us, we said 'you are' we went to the barn" (T419- 420).
"Hatred is contagious, from the attitude of love and forgiveness towards the old man, when we became our sister's child, no trace was left" (T 520).
There are many temporal differences in the conversational style sentences: "Our lady ձայն և the dog chain's ring came - 'kis', our ք while the dog rubbed the dog, then came the dog's odd bark, 'ham' և we were moaning and banging our heads on the wall" (T 434).
"The child was washing with our right movements", he squeezed his hands like us, "We felt from that circumstance, our words stumbled" (T 463).
H. Matosyan also uses other means of speech construction, which also contribute to giving a conversational tone to what is being said.
  One of them is the use of many determinants. In this way, the author seems to make him remember all the details of the depicted object in turn.
 This trick of creating an artistic image gives the word a hint of slowness and procrastination.
 Thus, "The child was standing in front of a picture of Rostom, a white horseman with a shotgun" (T 464).
"Grandpa was painted with a huge bull of the kolkhoz family" (T 465).
"Վրա At our noise, that beautiful, open, defenseless, female family came out" (T 468).
"… It seems that a stubborn young lady teacher with short hair cut on the clasp, in a dark jacket, with a clean white shirt buttoned up ..." (T490).
"Եցինք We carefully covered that painted metal door that opens on the path that goes deep into the forest (" (T 587).
In a literary language, if there are more than one verb in a sentence, the knot is usually placed after the first verb.
 H. Matthew 1 Poghosyan P., The Art of Speech, Yerevan, 1983, p. 250.
By violating this principle of literary language, he brought literature as a means of expressing spoken language.
"We knelt on the ground, restrained all his movements, sat on his back, and with the open pride of a child we became the forester" (T 489).
"The passing girls and brides whispered in each other's ears, laughed, the backstory said that we were already married, were silent and sad" (T 424).
"Hrant goes and finds the apple, comes and looks at the car and admires the mourner" (T 486).
"Koghbetsi drinks water, looks, sees, understands that what he wants is that" (T 487).
"The mason and the student carved their khachkar in the red quarry of Muradents, tied it to a young tree, tied it with two oxen, and managed to bring it to the head of the landslide" (T 495).
H. The next news brought by Matosyan is the use of verbs of the same time in the speech, which is also connected with the thought that was not thought out beforehand, let's be sure with examples: "People lived there, happy, sad, proud - now it was abandoned" (T 420).
"We kept the horse, we waited for it to come, so that we could shake our heads in reproach, growl, say" (T 477).
"That you have no right to enter the land of man and destroy, destroy, leave in the dirt, go" (T 478).
"It was difficult to say. He hesitated and did not want to say, but gathered his determination, became cruel and said… ”(T 515).
"The broken knife fell to the ground with our eyes, we bent down, took it, looked at it, folded the steel wire, put it in our pocket and left" (T 536).
In addition to the above-mentioned features, in the novels we find mixed, irregular, purely conversational sentences, such as: "We were your age, they got married, that is, as you are an orphan now, we will catch them and marry a khaki on the scale. The relative will not do that to the relative. relative to relative. Out of stupid stupidity, no matter what he says, I go to school, he does not say you are doing well, five years of illiteracy is enough for you… ”(T 463).
"Who are you there?" (T 475).
H. is clearer in the syntactic features. The power of Matosyan's pen.
 Here he not only used already known syntactic templates, but also used a number of means, new syntactic structures, which also give a conversational tone to the word.
  Comparing the two works under study, we saw that in the novel "Autumn" the author has achieved the freedom of speech mainly through grammatical realities.
 In the novel "The Lord" the innovations brought by the construction of the spoken language were revealed: the use of many determiners, the use of many verbs at the same time, the final use of the auxiliary verb in the case of several adjoining verbs, etc.
Aleta HakobyanNON LITERARY SYNTHRIC FEATURES H. IN MATEVOSYAN'S "LORD" AND "AUTUMN SUN" NOVELS Keywords: H. Matosyan, non-literary vocabulary, grammatical structures, directness of speech, change of syntax.
