MODELS OF POLITICAL OPPOSITION IN NON-DEMOCRATIC ADMINISTRATIONS The legitimate activity of the political opposition is an integral element of any democratic society.
  Public criticism of the government's policies and actions is as important for developed political systems as holding free and fair elections.
  As a key factor in the establishment of democracy, Robert Dahl draws attention to the possibility of political opposition, competition between the government and its opponents1.
  Ideas about the power of political opposition can also be found in the work of a number of other researchers in the theory of democracy.
 Ian Shapiro believes that democracy is the basis for the effective activity of both the opposition and the government2.
 And here is M. Duverger views the existence of political opposition in Political Parties as a phenomenon typical of Western democracies3.
The regime, within the framework of which it operates, has a great influence on the organization of the political opposition, the methods of its activities, as well as the issues raised by it.
 In developed political systems, political opposition is perceived as a powerful institution of democracy.
 Under certain circumstances, the opposition can replace the current political elite, becoming the government.
The situation of the political opposition in non-democratic regimes is different in terms of formation and activities.
 Here the problems of the opposition and the means of organization are radically different from those that operate in a democracy.
 The main feature of non-democratic systems in the study of the existence of political opposition ընդդիմ models of activity is the retention of the former holder of dominant political resources for several subsequent political phases, as well as the maximum concentration of those resources in one actor. distribution features or select 1 Dahl R., Polyarchy.
 Participation and Opposition, New Heaven and London.
 Yale University Press, 1971, p. 6.2 Shapiro I., Democracy's Place, Ithaca.
 Cornell University Press, 1996, p. 51.3 Duverger M., Political Parties, Their Organization and Activity in Modern State, New York.
  John Wiley & Sons, as a result.
  The government and the opposition act as enemies, whose goal is to destroy their political opponent.
In totalitarian regimes, the political opposition is in danger of de facto destruction. That is why the organized opposition is absent here or carries out underground activities.
  Here we can talk more about latent than real opposition.
  Political participation in authoritarian regimes is very limited.
  The government not only does not accept the activities of opposition groups - parties, but also tries to exclude them from their political processes.
 There are also cases when the political opposition, despite all the difficulties, can carry out legal activities, even participate in the elections organized by the regime. However, in authoritarian regimes, where legislation does not promote pluralism, democratic norms are largely declarative.
The methods of struggle for power by the opposition are different, depending on the nature of the political regime and historical conditions.
In this respect, V. Gelman distinguishes three types of opposition in non-democratic regimes:  A faction that includes part of the ruling regime that seeks to change the composition of the government without changing the nature of the regime;  Sectoral, whose members are usually conciliatory to the regime but aspire to it. to change certain aspects of the implemented policy, մատ Radical, which rejects the principles of the regime 1.
In the study of non-democratic regimes, the criteria of homogeneity or diversity of society are not as significant as those of democracy.
 In coercive monolithic systems, the dominant entity seeks the integration of society, the interests of minorities are not taken into account.
  Thus, homogeneity is a decisive factor influencing the development of opposition entities and their strategies.
  Therefore, in order to study the models of political opposition within the mentioned category, we propose to distinguish two types of monolithic systems: subjective-institutional, depending on the nature of the main center of power.
The political resource in subjective systems belongs to a specific entity, regardless of the position it occupies in the system of official bodies of power.
  Subjective monolithic systems can take the form of personal dictatorships, in which all possible political decisions are made by the leader, or in the form of party leadership, the distinguishing feature of which is the convergence of party-state apparatuses and the replacement of the latter with the former.
  Moreover, as a rule, the dictator or the political party, which alone manages the government resources, is above the system of state bodies, in fact they are not accountable to them.
  It is often difficult to clearly distinguish between these two types that characterize the degree of power distribution within the political decision-making process within the ruling elite.
1 Gelman V., Transformation in Russia.
  Political regime and democratic opposition, Moscow, 1999, The most important feature of subjective systems, which influences the models of the opposition, is the non-electoral or false electoral vote for the formation of power.
  As the real government entity is outside the state sphere, there is no clearly established procedure of rotation of government entities protected by law, which leads to the normalization of power-opposition relations by the will of one of the participants in the hands of one political force.
 The consequence is the principled pressure of the internal political struggle in such systems.
The existing regime is beneficial for the ruling entity.
 Not only outside the ruling party, but also the opposition inside it is eliminated, and the ruling party, as in the USSR and Eastern Europe, is based on the principle of "democratic centralism".
  The opposition is recognized as disloyal to the system and anti-systemic.
  As R. rightly claims. Dal, a strict one-party regime, is unable to distinguish the opposition, which poses a threat to it, from the safe one1.
  Consequently, the principled position of such a regime becomes the destruction of any opposition, whether it is loyal or disloyal.
Institutional monolithic systems differ in that the dominant political resource is constitutionally և de facto enshrined in state institutions.
  Thus, monolithic institutional systems are characterized by the steadfast submission of the institutions exercising state power to one political force, in the absence of barriers to the activities of alternative political forces.
It is also necessary to differentiate the methods of struggle against the opposition in general, but nevertheless, in totalitarian-authoritarian regimes that differ in a number of features.
  In these two types of non-popular regimes, different methods of fighting the opposition can be recorded at different stages of the Soviet administrative system.
  Not only was it impossible to talk about real democracy in the Soviet system, but on the contrary, it completely ruled out the nature of a democratic society.
 This type of administrative system is characterized by the narrow circle leading the seizure of political power, as well as the implementation of the will of the latter on the ground.
 The opposite of this phenomenon is considered to be the alienation of the society, the political indifference, even the hostile attitude of the society towards the authorities.
  This system is obviously incompatible with pluralism, political and ideological independence.
K. Ponomarev notes that the administrative system is in fact a monarchy.
  Moreover, the government has a monopoly in all spheres - personal abilities, work, even the life and destiny of individuals.
  By its nature, it is authoritarian, and in some periods, even totalitarian.
  Power is in fact seized by the state party bureaucracy or by individuals with the help of the latter, but formally it is exercised on behalf of the people2.
1 Dahl R., Introduction.- Regimes and Opposition, New Haven and London.
 Yale University Press, p. 98. During the years of Stalin's violence, the response to any criticism of the opposition, the "leader of the people", was the intimidation of the authorities.
  It was accompanied by strict ideological control, intolerance of any dissent, as reflected in the principle "he who is not with us is against us" 1.
 Such an approach և violence against non-governmental political forces led to the fact that the majority of the society becomes a silent executor of government decisions.
  The introduction of collectivism was accompanied by the opposition of individualism.
  Under the motto "The team is right in any case", the supremacy of collectivism over the individual was confirmed, the majority - the minority.
  The main negative consequences of the implementation of such a policy are the false equalization of individuals, their observation in a common, imaginary class, the behavior of which was defined by the system.
  The ideological similarity limited the discovery of the creative potential of individuals, the spread of ideas of pluralism, as it reduced the role of the minority in public life.
It must also be acknowledged that a minority can also make mistakes or take a wrong position on this or that issue, but must have the rights guaranteed by law to express an opinion, to pursue its goals through legal means.
 And the majority can not always be right in all situations for the simple reason that new, non-traditional ideas do not appear to all members of society at the same time, but appear in the minds of several, only after that they become universally applicable.
Unlike a totalitarian regime, which, as already mentioned, does not accept any kind of opposition activity and seeks to destroy it in any such way, authoritarian regimes do not exclude the activities of the political opposition within its defined borders.
  Naturally, this tolerance of the system first of all refers to the systemic opposition, which maintains loyalty to the system, and the opposition activity is directed to certain members of the political elite or certain branches of politics.
However, the role of the political opposition does not remain unchanged at different stages of the transformation of democratizing societies.
 In order to understand it, it is necessary to determine the place of the political opposition among other political forces operating in democratic systems.
Such forces are the active supporters of the system (who think that the existing status quo best suits their political and economic interests), the ones who take punitive actions (who support the ruling regime), the passive supporters of the system, the active opponents, the passive opponents2.
 In general, the active opposition contributes to the fall of the authoritarian regime, as well as creates favorable conditions for democratization.
  However, the number of their members, the level of organization ությունը the influence greatly 2 Stepan A., On the Tasks of a Democratic Opposition // The Global Resurgent of Democracy, Baltimore and London.
They differ depending on the ruling regime (its period of prosperity or decline or period of decline).
 In the first of the mentioned regions, the most prominent supporters of the system actively support its policy, including even repressive methods.
 But the majority of the population, including the "middle class", is generally silent, and sometimes openly supports the administration.
 In this situation, more difficult conditions arise for the activity of active opponents of the system.
The situation is radically changing during the fall of the authoritarian regime.
  Cracks appear in the ranks of the ruling groups.
  The collapse of the system forces some groups to gradually move away from their unpopular policies.
 It is not ruled out that the supporters of the system will turn into passive opponents, sometimes into active opponents, and turn into a political opposition.
Alexander Sargsyan MODELS OF POLITICAL OPPOSITION IN NON-DEMOCRATIC ADMINISTRATIONS Keywords: political opposition, non-democratic regime, models of political opposition.
