THE ROLE OF CULTURE ON THE BASIS OF FOREIGN LANGUAGE LEARNING In the process of teaching a foreign language, the relationship between the language and the culture to which the language is familiar is always a subject of discussion.
 Cultural instruction is always pushed into the background, it seems that when the lecturer manages to present the culture in addition to the language, it is additional information, of course, a great advantage.
 However, such teaching of culture, which is perceived as an additional material, cannot be satisfied with its enormous importance in mastering a foreign language.
 The article thoroughly studies the role of culture in language teaching, culture-language, as well as the thinking-relation, etc.
  S. studied as a theoretical basis for studying this topic. Seferyan, L. Hovhannisyan, A. Lazaryan, A. Sukiasyan, S. Galstyan, N. Chomsky, R. Gardner, U. The work of Lambert և other researchers.
The question of the superiority of one of them over the other in the language-culture-thinking relationship has been the subject of study by many, reflected in the works of such scholars as F. Boas, b. Warf, E. Sepir և others.
 Culture is a whole, which includes art, people's experience accumulated over the years, knowledge, etc.
 Language is a system that expresses the interconnectedness and interrelationships of its subsystems.
 In this sense, language is more than a form of cultural expression.
 Language և It is impossible to imagine culture independently of each other. Language culture or culture language In the first case, language helps to understand the general picture of the given culture.
 In the second, culture և its peculiarities and concepts contribute to the acquisition of language.
  The presentation of culture is necessary in the introductory stage of the foreign language course.
 In order to master some linguistic concepts, one often has to refer to the peculiarities or stereotypes of the given culture, for example, when studying English phrases we can notice cultural features characteristic of the English - "to collect ones wits" - to gather thoughts, to gather, "tofrighten smb out of his wits" - to frighten to death, "at ones wits end" - confused, bewildered 1, that is, they prefer the word wit when it comes to mind, reason, because they think that the word is more communicative in this context than the rest, Although 1 Seferyan S., Hovhannisyan L., Lazaryan A., English-Armenian Phrasebook, Yerevan, 1986, p. 238.
In English, there are many words for similar concepts.
 In Armenian, for example, the phrase "to go back to death, to take life-threatening steps, to put death in the mouth or to send one to be endangered"
 The same can be said for grammatical phenomena, for example, in different cultural perceptions this or that noun is seen as collective or vice versa. collective whole) puts a subjunctive in the singular, and in the plural in Turkish).
Culture expresses the "content" of language.
  It turns out that culture is the basis of language in the same way that "content" is "horse", that is, culture is the meaning of culture, and language is the phonetic framework.
  First you have to understand the "idea", after which it will be easy to remember the "expression" Complete.
  In general, language is conceived as a way of expressing an abstract expression, but it can be realized in different ways, for example, in many cultures, language is expressed by symbols, signs, etc.
 Many people reproduce the language with gestures, various hand movements, which in order to understand, we must be aware of the cultural context.
 Why did this language come about through the expression of cultural diversity?
 Culture shapes an individual's communication behavior; thinking is an integral part of that expression.
 It is transmitted to future generations through language.
Can we separate language, culture, thinking?
  Analyzing from different angles, we come to the conclusion that each of them is an element of unity of the three, without which language can not come to its full form և basic function, because human cognitive abilities can not encode a living language system isolated from culture և from thinking.
  For example, Esperanto is not considered a living language because it is culturally separate.
In order to study the language in depth, culture can support the knowledge of a foreign language by combining culture with the mother tongue և culture, as what has been combined by highlighting differences and similarities may be easier to understand.
 Given that language is also based on a set of cultural stereotypes, we can consider that language defines the behavior of the linguist of a given culture, therefore the main precondition for learning in an accurate way comes from the study of culture.
For example, if someone really wants to learn Georgian without recognizing the cultural values ​​of the Georgian people, the individual attitude of Georgians towards each other, etc., he can not effectively learn how to express a request or admiration in Georgian.
  Cultural differences also affect the understanding of semantic units, for example, the phrase "to go upstairs" is used by the British 1 Sukiasyan A., Galstyan S., Phrasebook of the Armenian Language, Yerevan, 1975, p. 407.
Cannot sleep, but Americans literally use to go to the second floor.
 It turns out that without knowing the cultural differences we can understand the given expression in the given context.
The learner's attitude and interest are very important for learning a second foreign language.
  These factors are decisive; they have social, cognitive and affective contexts.
  Social և cognitive factors, respectively, refer to the areas of communication և the conceptual field of perception.
 Language is a means of communication, a way in which people enter into social communication.
  Every individual learns a language through complex social interactions with people1, ար In order to stimulate the desire to learn and the learner's interest in general, one must be informed about the culture.
 The integrative orientation remains balanced in this case2.
 That is, the greatness of motivation is directly proportional to the condition of being aware of the culture, otherwise the learner with only a certain vocabulary արտահայտ cannot express the reality, a reality that is a foreign culture.
 Language is a communication skill that is not separate from social problems; if the educator or learner is not aware of the cultural meaning of the unit, then he does not know the meaning of the word.
  Effective communication is based on the evaluative attitude of the materials, which again comes from the cultural context.
 For example, the word "foreign" can have different stylistic uses depending on the ethnic background of the people, so when saying an evaluative attitude or opinion about a phenomenon, one should take into account their linguistic behavior and attitude.
As already mentioned above, the compiled language contains one of the most important elements in linguistic relativity - thinking.
 The cultural context translates our conceptual units into living speech through thinking.
  Language survives through thinking, on the contrary, without the internal text of language, the mind is uncertain, and nothing can be clear until the language is happy.
  On the other hand, in the basis of the cultural context, an idea is created, and then the means of expressing it.
Cultural Thinking LanguageLanguage can express any idea based on a cultural context4.
  Although Patrick Moran points out that culture և language can be distinguished for different pedagogical methods5, even if we try to focus on the teaching of language's, it is the same, they are already based on the cultural aspect.
 And that culture is more than folk holidays, songs, customs, etc.
 Yes, language is a way to learn about the above, but և we can not actually use language without culture in the classroom.
  That is, culture more 3 Seely H., Teaching Culture.
  Strategies for Foreign Language Educators, Skokie, IL.
  National Textbook Company, 5 Moran P., Teaching Culture.
 Perspectives In Practice, Boston.
 Heinle & Heinle, 2001, p. 39. is a more complex system than, for example, the written word.
  However, it is not widely accepted that language is an equally complex system; it is impossible to teach it only in the "classroom" 1.
  Effective communication can be about how people of that culture express their gratitude to others or how they express their requests.
  When translating into English, it is important to distinguish between formal and informal request forms (formal: "would you please be so kind as to give me a pen", informal: "give me a pen, please").
 That is, cultural behavior determines the choice of the right expression based on the situation և the interlocutor.
The language to be collected in the functioning գործող living "memory" requires various rhetorical tricks (rhythm, rhythm, etc. 2) that make it easier to remember information.
  Thus, different films of fiction or other genre can be included in the tasks given by the pedagogue.
  By watching them, students can focus on the actors' behavior or gestures, setting clear principles for communicating in any target language.
  The discussion of different proverbs is also essential for defining cultural preconditions.
Native speakers of the language can also be involved in the language teaching process, which with their participation will make beginner learners a part of their culture.
Specially selected literary texts allow to perceive the deep part of the culture, they are very decisive, because the learner creates an unforgettable experience, his own reaction to the perception of the new.
Thus, all the above theoretical conclusions can be easily substantiated by practical experience, which has been done by beginners in English.
  Some of the students started to study the language from culture, others - exclusively from the grammar of the language.
  After some time, when both groups were able to speak English, the study showed that only the first group was able to communicate effectively, exhibiting culturally appropriate language behaviors that made the language more vivid and natural than just the vocabulary of the guided concepts. the second group.
1 Byram M., Esarte-Sarries V., Investigating Cultural Studies in Foreign Language Teaching, Clevedon, Avon.
Gohar Charkandyan THE ROLE OF CULTURE IN THE BASIS OF FOREIGN LANGUAGE TEACHING Keywords: language, culture, thought, subsystem, idiom, linguistic concept, cultural context, grammatical phenomenon, content, expression plan, communicative, linguistic, communicative, behavioral
