LEGAL BASIS OF BANKRUPTCY Legal regulation of economic relations has been և remains a mandatory function of the state as a representative of the common interests of citizens.
 One of the legal mechanisms for eliminating the deviations in the behavior of the subjects of normally developing economic relations is the institution of bankruptcy at the point of intersection of private and public law.
 The latter can be seen as a special manifestation of state intervention in ensuring the normal course of economic relations.
With the help of the Bankruptcy Institute, it is possible to carry out structural changes in the economic system, removing unscrupulous participants in property from the system, "redistributing their material resources among honest participants in public relations."
Based on the above, we have studied the institution of bankruptcy at the intersection of private and public law.
The main purpose of the research is to comprehensively study the system of legislation regulating the institution of bankruptcy, as a result of revealing the existing problems in it, to give theoretically substantiated proposals, which, taking into account the peculiarities of the RA legal system, will increase the efficiency of legal regulation.
By declaring the economic entities bankrupt, it is done by the creditors (the economic entities are responsible for non-fulfillment of their obligations with all their property), the debtor (sometimes it is possible to improve his financial situation through financial recovery program, satisfy the creditors' claims without terminating the debtor). պաշտպան protection of public interests (the institution of bankruptcy makes it possible to get rid of the participants in the economic relations that disrupt those relations in time, consequently ել to protect the public interests) 1.
The legal fixation of the grounds for bankruptcy, the approach adopted by the legislator on the grounds of bankruptcy, is extremely important for the legal settlement of bankruptcy relations.
The RA Law on Bankruptcy, depending on the circumstance of who is the initiator of the bankruptcy case, envisages individual businessmen և lawyer 1 See Barseghyan T., Business Law, textbook, Yerevan, 2009, pp. 153-154.
There are various grounds for declaring people bankrupt.
  According to Article 3 of the law, the debtor can be declared bankrupt by a court decision on his own initiative (voluntary bankruptcy application) or at the request of the creditor (forced bankruptcy application), if the debtor is insolvent.
  Despite the fact that the RA Law on Bankruptcy considers insolvency as the basis of "voluntary" and "forced" bankruptcy, nevertheless, it follows from the legislative wording that the legislator considers the incapacity of two economic categories as the basis for declaring business entities bankrupt.
  According to Article 3 of the Law, the debtor is insolvent (unable to pay) if there is one of the following grounds: a) the debtor's liabilities exceed the value of the debtor's assets by a thousand times the statutory minimum wage (balance insolvency); (b) the debtor is unable to meet its overdue monetary liabilities (de facto insolvency).
Insolvency exists when, regardless of the assets available to meet the claims of all creditors, the debtor allows points of payment obligations2.
 The payment obligation is indisputable if the debtor does not object to it, or if he objects to the said obligation, but: a) the payment obligation is recognized by a judgment or judgment that has entered into force, հնարավոր there is no possibility of settlement, b) the claim is based on a written transaction; և the debtor does not prove that he has sufficient grounds to object to the claim (including the settlement of the claim); c) the claim arises from the debtor's obligation to pay taxes, duties or other mandatory payments; the debtor does not prove that he has sufficient grounds to object to the claim (including (d) the settlement of the claim), d) the undisputed part of the claim exceeds one thousand times the minimum wage established by law.
  In other words, there are two types of insolvency - actual - balance sheet.
 Insolvency means lack of ability to pay.
The analysis of the RA Law on Bankruptcy proves that the law "distinguishes between two forms of insolvency" - balance sheet (in case of negative balance) - in fact, it is a situation when the debtor is able to fully satisfy the legal requirements of creditors.
 These two types of insolvency are separated from each other, համար the law does not require the simultaneous existence of these two types of insolvency in order to declare the debtor bankrupt.
The RA Court of Cassation, by the decision made within the framework of the civil case HYKD / 0414/04/083, registered that in the case when the given monetary obligation is based on legal acts that have entered into legal force, the payment obligation is indisputable.
 Moreover, the law considers insolvency as the main criterion for initiating a bankruptcy case, as the amount of debts is considered an indisputable fact, վիճ disputing the creditors' claims by the debtor does not preclude going to court 1 See Belych V. page 293.
2 See Barseghyan T., Page 157.
3 See http.
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?docid=52753, civil case number HYKD / 0414/04/08.
դիսանում.
  In case of a dispute, the substantiation of the claim, as well as the amount of the debt can be determined by the court1.
25.02.2008 of the RA Constitutional Court By decision 2 անգամ once և it is confirmed that the law is based on the presumption of insolvency.
Moreover, the "presumption of insolvency" in its turn is based on the "presumption of good faith" of the debtor, ie if the debtor does not fulfill his obligations, then the non-fulfillment of the obligation is explained not by his dishonesty, but by his inability to pay.
In this context, we would like to refer to the decision made in the case of the RA Court of Cassation EKD / ​​0074/04/093.
  The following question became a problem in the framework of this case. Is the liability considered uncontested in the context of a dispute over a transaction underlying bankruptcy? և Can a dispute over a transaction underlying a bankruptcy be considered as having sufficient grounds to challenge the claim.
The Court of Cassation found that in order to question the indisputability of payment obligations on the basis of Article 3, Part 2, Clause "b" of the Bankruptcy Law of the Republic of Armenia, it is sufficient to have not only the existence of grounds proving the debtor's obligation or the existence of a clause, but also the existence of legal dispute. The reason for the dispute is that the wording "sufficient grounds for objection" includes the existence of a substantive dispute concerning the grounds of the obligation.
 In view of the above, the Court of Cassation found that a substantive dispute had arisen between the parties, which was being considered in another case, and the defendant's filing of a claim, as well as the existence of a court decision to accept the claim, was assessed as sufficient evidence that the defendant had sufficient grounds to recognize. to object to the claim.
The Court of Cassation, in the framework of case No. 3-2475 (TD), answering the question "should the court refer to the existence of a substantive dispute when declaring the subject bankrupt (insolvent)?" "When rejecting a claim for bankruptcy on the basis of a dispute, the courts should not, in essence, refer to a substantive dispute, so as not to restrict the right of a person to apply to a court for the examination of that dispute."
Despite the fact that the RA Law on Bankruptcy comprehensively regulates the relations in this sphere, nevertheless it has certain shortcomings that need to be corrected.
 At first glance, it seems not so important at first glance, but in reality one of the essentials is that the law lacks an article dedicated to the interpretation of basic concepts, while this is the normative-legal act that introduces new concepts into the RA legislation.
1 See Karelina S., The right regulation of insolvency (bankruptcy).
 textbook пособое, Москва, 2002, p. 24.
2 See RA Constitutional Court 25.02.2008 Decision No. C-735 was available on the official website of the judiciary: http.
//www.arlis.am/DocumentView.aspx?docid=42089.
3 See "Selection of Civil-Administrative Cases of the Court of Cassation of the Republic of Armenia (January-December 2011)", Yerevan, 2012, pp. 74-79.
4 See "Selection of Judgments of the Court of Cassation (September-December 2006)", Yerevan, 2007, p. 446.
According to the RA Law on Legal Acts, if new normative legal concepts or concepts are used in the normative legal act, which are not unambiguously understood without explanation, then their definitions should be given by that legal act (Article 42) 1.
The lack of basic concepts has led to the fact that the definitions of certain bankruptcy procedures, entities, categories are either not disclosed by law (bankruptcy, insolvency, manager, interim manager, creditors' meeting) or are given within separate articles (financial recovery, financial recovery plan). , self-regulatory organization of managers, secured obligations), which is an unnecessary burden for certain articles of the law.
Another important issue is the lack of a separate article on the purpose of the law.
  Legislative stipulation of the goals of the Institute is of key importance, as the direction of the legal regulation of the bankruptcy proceedings is connected with the goals of the law.
We believe that in case the concept of "bankruptcy" is defined in the law, in order to fully understand the institute, its characteristic features must be pointed out, as well as the consequences for the entity that can be declared bankrupt.
 In addition, the law does not have the necessary workload to ensure the implementation of social protection of the society (as a confirmation of what has been said, it is enough to remember Article 82 of the law և its analysis).
  The procedure for satisfying the claims of creditors provided by law does not correspond to the role and significance of the law as a social regulator.
  This is one of the most important issues to which the legislator should take a different approach.
Referring to the sequence of satisfaction of creditors' claims provided for in Article 82 of the Law, we believe that it should be subject to significant changes for the following reasons:
Article 82 of the law stipulates that the claims of secured creditors, the remuneration of the manager միայն only after the reimbursement of administrative costs, the claims of the citizens before whom the debtor is liable for harm to their life or health are met by calculating the relevant periodic payment capitalization, such as the debtor Alimony requirements for a citizen (child, incapacitated parent, incapacitated spouse), claims arising from employment contracts (including from the date of entry into force of the debtor's bankruptcy decision until its dissolution), but not more than 6 months prior to the debtor's declaration of bankruptcy;Remuneration payments under copyright agreements և Income tax and mandatory funded pension payments arising from the satisfaction of the current requirements.
We believe that the proposal to make changes in the sequence defined by Article 82 of the law stems from the need to bring its provisions in line with the RA Constitution, as they contradict a number of norms of the Constitution.
1 See RA Law on Legal Acts, ARPA 02.05.21 / 15 (190), Article 42.
After the analysis of Articles 1, 37, 48 of the RA Constitution, it follows that the Republic of Armenia is a social state.
  It turns out that in the conditions when the task of a state declared socially by the Constitution is a complete-active system of guarantees for protection of human rights, including the creation of a legal system, the increase of social protection and welfare of people through the provision of legislative guarantees 1, Article 82 of the Bankruptcy Law The idea of ​​a welfare state is guided by the principles of the priority of property security inherent in single-market relations, the priority of private interests.
In such conditions, in our opinion, not only the provision of the Law, which stipulates that the claims of the citizens whose life or health is damaged by the debtor or to whom they have alimony obligations 2 are met, but also the fact that within the 3rd turn of satisfaction of the claims Claims arising only from employment contracts (including the decision on the bankruptcy of the debtor from the moment of its entry into force until its liquidation) may be satisfied, but not more than 6 months prior to the moment of the bankruptcy of the debtor.
 Within the framework of such a regulation, the claims arising from the employment contracts of the persons, which arose 7 months before the moment of declaring bankruptcy, remain unsatisfied.
Part 2 of Article 65 of the RA Labor Code stipulates that the claims presented to the employer must be reasoned.
 It follows from the above that if the claims arising from the employment contract submitted to the bankrupt employer are reasonable, they must be satisfied in the first place in the bankruptcy proceedings, regardless of the time of occurrence of such claims.
The above-mentioned norms once again substantiate that the claims of secured creditors should be satisfied in general, only after satisfying the claims of the debtor's employees for damages caused to the life or health of the debtor.
 By the way, the debtor's employees անձ persons receiving compensation from the debtor for damages caused to life or health should be included not in a row, but in a queue, providing equal opportunities for the protection of rights for both of these socially vulnerable entities.
 In case of envisaging in different queues, the claims of the persons receiving compensation from the debtor for the damages caused to life or health should be the first, and in the second, the claims of the debtor's employees, regardless of the time of their occurrence.
By the same logic, we propose to make an amendment to Article 70 of the RA Civil Code3.
1 This also refers to the social security system, which primarily deals with disturbed destinies: disability, illness, loss of breadwinner, unemployment, insecure old age, etc., as well as the existence of an effective social security system that regulates social risk.
2 For more details, see the RA Family Code, Articles 68, 73, 75, 77, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85.
3 Article 70 of the RA Civil Code speaks about the procedure for satisfying claims in case of liquidation of legal entities.
 The same logic works here.
The law should be amended to apply to the court with a claim to declare the debtor bankrupt in enforcement proceedings in case of discovery of grounds for bankruptcy.
Until 22.12.2010 Amendment to the Bankruptcy Law of the Republic of Armenia: Obligation of the creditor or other persons to apply to the court in accordance with Article 6, Part 2, in case of bankruptcy grounds, the compulsory executor is obliged to file a lawsuit to declare the debtor bankrupt, regardless of whether all enforcement proceedings are the same with the compulsory executor or not.
Based on the analysis of the above-mentioned articles of the law (before the amendment և after that), we think that in that respect Article 6 of the RA Law on Bankruptcy with the previous edition envisaged a more correct legal regulation.
  In the current legal framework, the compulsory executor, in case of confiscation of the entire property of the debtor during the compulsory execution of the decision on confiscation of property, finds that the property is not sufficient to ensure the full fulfillment of the obligations to the creditor (claimant) or judicial service. In case of satisfying the claim of the creditor (claimant), in case of insufficiency of more than one thousand times the minimum wage defined by the property law, it will be impossible to carry out this or other enforcement proceedings (ies) in full fulfillment of obligations to another creditor (claimant);is obliged to immediately suspend the enforcement proceedings (ies) պարտ to offer the creditor and the debtor to file for bankruptcy within one day at the initiative of one of them, ոչ if new creditors or already known creditors appear after the decision to suspend the enforcement proceedings is announced The debtor applies to the bailiff not to resume the enforcement proceedings, then the bailiff offers them to file for bankruptcy; he does not resume the enforcement proceedings.և If new creditors appear after the announcement of the decision to suspend the enforcement proceedings or the already known creditor applies to the compulsory executor with a request not to resume the enforcement proceedings, the enforcement agent offers them to file for bankruptcy; the enforcement proceedings do not resume.և If new creditors appear after the announcement of the decision to suspend the enforcement proceedings or the already known creditor applies to the compulsory executor with a request not to resume the enforcement proceedings, the enforcement agent offers them to file for bankruptcy; the enforcement proceedings do not resume.
  If the debtor or creditor does not file for bankruptcy in court within the period defined by this part, or new creditors do not appear, the compulsory executor shall resume the enforcement proceedings.
In our opinion, the enforcement agent, finding out during the enforcement proceedings that there are grounds for the debtor's bankruptcy, should apply to the court to declare him bankrupt, not waiting for the debtor or his creditors to apply to court, while the current RA Law on Bankruptcy provides a completely different regulation.
The advantage of Article 6 of the previous version of the law is that the only basis for filing an application for an employee of the Judicial Acts Compulsory Enforcement Service was that the satisfaction of the creditor (s) claim by the enforcement entity would lead to the impossibility of fulfilling the obligation to the creditor (creditors).
  Analyzing this wording of the law, it is obvious that at least two enforcement proceedings were required for a compulsory executor to file for bankruptcy, while the law currently provides for the debtor's property to be insufficient to satisfy the claim of another creditor in the same enforcement proceedings.
  The RA Law on Bankruptcy used to be more regulated, with the obligation to file for bankruptcy if the relevant grounds exist.
In case the debtor, the creditor does not apply to the court for bankruptcy, the insolvent entities continue to act, entering into new civil relations, assuming new responsibilities, աբար naturally creating additional obstacles for the entities entering into those relations.
  Moreover, the existence of such insolvent economic entities does not allow to get the real picture of the RA economy, և economic analyzes lead to wrong solutions.
 The existence of such entities leads to unrealistic state budget planning.
 We should not forget that the institution of bankruptcy is mainly connected with business. Individual businessmen are declared bankrupt և legal entities, which get the right to do business only from the moment of state registration, which in turn pursues effective taxation, registration of the given sector, business turnover Purpose of providing information on.
 Meanwhile, as a result of not applying to the court to declare the insolvent debtor bankrupt, as a result of not declaring him bankrupt, the goals pursued by the state-registered individual entrepreneur, legal entity are nullified.
 In addition, in case of temporary removal of an insolvent, non-performing or unscrupulous entity from the business turnover, the rights and interests of the other participants in the business turnover are violated.
Information on declaring the debtor bankrupt is posted on the official website of the Public Notices of the Republic of Armenia, through which it is possible to find out about the entities declared bankrupt և to avoid entering into relations with them.
 In the case when the subjects with such obligations do not apply to the court with a claim for bankruptcy, the other participants of the civil-business turnover may enter into a new relationship with the debtor in the absence of information about the insolvency; they may find themselves in a state of insolvency.
The obligation to apply to a court to declare a compulsory executor bankrupt is intended to secure the interests of creditors with small claims, due to the claim against the debtor, in the amount of the state fee charged for filing for bankruptcy1.
 In such a case, creditors with small claims prefer not to go to court with a claim to declare the debtor bankrupt, especially if they do not have sufficient guarantees that the debtor has property, or his property will be sufficient to compensate the creditor's original claim և court costs.
This gives grounds to conclude that in case of existence of appropriate grounds for the service of the Judicial Acts Compulsory Enforcement Service to apply to the court with a bankruptcy claim 1 See RA Law on State Duty, ARPA 1998.01.11 / 1, Article 9.
The provision of liability will have a positive effect on the performance of the obligations of entities that do not fulfill their obligations or conscientiously, by meeting the requirements of creditors, which will increase the chances of meeting the requirements of creditors and protecting the interests of each of them.
  Withdrawal of economic entities as a result of bankruptcy will lead to the recovery of the economy and obtaining a real picture.
Maro Margaryan LEGAL BASIS OF BANKRUPTCY Keywords: bankruptcy, insolvency, debtor, creditor, payment obligation, bankruptcy grounds, bankruptcy institution, economic relationship, voluntary-compulsory bankruptcy
.
