Brave Nazar has been destined for centuries in Armenian literature.
 Nazar, who entered literature with his centuries-old destiny, had to express himself, peculiarities typical of his time.
 Naturally, different authors had to leave their handwriting on Nazar's fate.
  The material was referred to by Hovh. Tumanyan, St. Zoryan, Av. Isahakyan, Hamastegh, D. Demirchyan, M. Sargsyan և others.
 These developments could not be similar to each other, as they had to adapt to the peculiarities of the given period and the political environment.
 In this sense, Tumanyan's and Demirchyan ևsargsyan's elaborations reveal differences, expressed in genre peculiarity: fairy tale, play, novel.
Long-term destiny forced Brave Nazar to change his genre, making a transition from a fairy tale to a novel.
  To discover the image of the brave Nazar, his mystery, we need to examine his philosophy.
  Nazar Tumanyan is the bearer of luck. "What courage, what genius.
They are all empty things.
  The thing is my man's luck.
  Are you lucky, have fun… »1.
Zoryan Nazar comes up with another powerful idea: revenge: “I am very angry with the world, my world is full of evil, unjust things.
I say, let me go and curse the lord of this world.
  It is neither big nor small ”2.
  Having this goal in front of him, Nazar curses the father of both the world and his brothers and daughters-in-law.
  Nazir Demirchyan is the only one who stands out from the others with his solution.
  Nazar did not remain on the throne, this breaks the philosophy of luck.
  Here it is necessary to single out the lucky concepts of Nazari Nazareth.
 If Nazar does not bring luck in this case, then Nazar's luck always brings.
  And that Nazar is being destroyed, but Nazarism is still alive, J. "Wait՜. Look. how can I destroy the world?
 In this respect, Dr. V. Piloyan's observation. "Tumanyan's Brave Nazar symbolizes courage (power), which is permanent, in Demirchyan's case, a specific ruler who is revolutionary.
  In other words, Tumanyan and Demirchyan do not oppose each other, they complement each other in a different way. ”4
 Մ. Sargsyan Nazar is an ideologically mature figure, he understands that he owes his luck and glory to fear, the rusty sword, the flag and, of course, the people.
 He is already fully aware of his 1 Tumanyan H., Tales, Yerevan, 1988, page 40.
2 Zoryan St., Collection of works, vol. 6, Yerevan, 1990, p. 487.
3 Demirchyan D., Collection of works, vol. 10, Yerevan, 1985, p. 244.
4 Piloyan V., The artistic thinking of the beginning of the XX century ությունը The work of Leon Shant, Yerevan, 2007, pp. 117, 118.
all the possibilities of the type. "You are not the only coward in the world, Nazar, nor the most cowardly.
 But beware of the cowards, Nazar, beware.
Of those whose sword is rusty, they have a flag.
 The real brave are fools, Nazar, fools, because they only have a sword, without a flag ”1.
Mkrtich Sargsyan's novel is close to the modern reality.
 Nazar's image here bears not only the features of the previous ones, but also acquired new features, became a perfect embodiment of the dictator. "I am a king and my world trembles," the people are born for me, live for me, die for me.
  The people must work, I will eat "," go and hang the people ".
The world war is also ridiculed. "Now I will defeat everyone.
 That's why, now, I want to put the whole world under my feet.
Why so much power and kingdom?
 I'm enough. "
To refer to the "Brave Nazar" fairy tale ("Dzhikon") for the first time, to write G. Srvandztyants և 1884 to publish in his "Taste-Smell" collection of folklore materials.
  Fear is the main key to creating and revealing the image of Dzhiko-Nazar, which, intertwined with bragging, elevates him to the throne.
  Unhappiness and poverty due to his cowardice become the beginning of wealth և happiness, which years later the people should call "Nazar's luck".
 Here luck is hidden under seven ideas.
  It is known that seven is accepted by the people as a number-symbol of success.
 And here the seven giants come to fill the seven flies, են fame and glory precede the hero who slept peacefully.
 It turns out that the seven flies raise his self-confidence, and the seven giants, through the seven flies on paper, his glory.
 It turns out that the giants fly in terms of mental strength.
  A very important question arises as to why the people raised Nazar to the throne.
  The event must be explained by the discretion and wisdom of the Armenian people. The Armenian people, being constantly in tension, have always needed to rely on someone.
 This is what has blinded the people and the fairy-tale giants that are part of it.
Tumanyan's image of the same name is only cowardly, weak, helpless, even talking, because it can be revealed.
 If Dzhiko was described by the people as cowardly and unhappy, he is poor here.
  Like many literary critics, V. Sargsyan thinks that the mystery of Nazareth is hidden in luck and coincidence, but to them is added a carb, the belief in one's own strength.
 Dzhiko believes that seven flies turn into seven.
  The poetic formula for the logical continuation of this was given by Tumanyan. Invincible hero, brave Nazar, To smash a thousand with one blow.
Tumanyan is helped by Nazar shouting, the flag, the priests writing a "joke number".
  The flag written with a joke is joined by the bragging of those gathered at the party, և the cowardly Nazar becomes the Brave Nazar.
 Attributing the brave cataclysmic epithet to Nazar is one of Ts Tumanyan's inventions.
 The people may think that they are the result of "heroic" scenes created as a result of the hero's fear.
  Thus, the life of a poor and lazy person 1 Sargsyan M., Kaj Nazar, Yerevan, 1980, p. 52.
2 Ibid., Pp. 242, 243.
He tends to play the role of a hero.
 No genius, no wisdom and wisdom. He is simply accompanied by luck and coincidence.
 And while people follow his unparalleled heroism from above, Nazar himself remains "astonished" when "he sees the world in his grasp."
Demirchyan Nazar brought with him literature an improved fermented type, because the hero of the fairy tale entered into political satire and changed Tumanyan's commentary.
  Under the fairy tale, Demirchyan assumes an implicit text, which is often not fully understood under the guise of comedy.
 However, on this occasion the author writes: "Brave Nazar" is a satire, directed against nationalist, tsarist, ARF-individual adventurism.
  The horse is fairytale, therefore և deliberate, conditional և fantastic.
However, the content is a serious critique of the reality that took place in our country before the Soviet Union և continues to exist outside the Soviet Union, in the capitalist, feudal order… »1.
This case is based on the solid structure of Tumanyan's plot, the image-life truth and the unbreakable psychology.
  In the past, Nazar was cunning with the instinct of self-defense, often betraying himself with panic, presenting his horrors and feelings in an inverted image, otherwise the factor of chance would be ruled out, the role of people around him would be reduced.
  Here Nazar is already on the royal throne, with pride and luck he becomes a tyrant perfect.
  Among these tyrannical features, Nazar's dictatorial order-program to reconstruct what happened stands out. "Let the sun rise in the west from the rising of the sun even today."
 People are born and die.
 And whatever human work is done, let it continue to be done.
 By which let the law of God be fulfilled, the law of man, or "let a king rule and make the world" 2.
  Cruelty and cynicism enter the character of a fairy-tale hero as a political disease աղ a filth of human character.
  Nazar, the lord of the ragged flag, finds his fortune, which he does not miss until he is deprived of the throne.
  In other words, Demirchyan did not consider the factor of luck a priority.
 In this case, it is not Nazar's luck, but Nazarism.
  If the previous Nazars were helped by the people, who came with a united horse, և No other characters are named except Nazar, then here the author singled them out և named Sako, Voskan, toastmaster, priest, teacher, Tados.
  This series is replenished in the palace: Nazir, Vizier, Seneca.
  Their courtly gestures and language are opposed by the new king's cynical and "gyady" speech, which for them is not only "smart and wise" but also the king's originality.
  Nazar realizes his full power. "What courage, what wisdom, what genius?
  Luck is the thing, luck!
  Are you lucky, have fun, sleep is the world ”3.
 And here the author offers a new solution for Nazar, who ascended the throne by luck.
 Like his predecessors, he does not stay on the throne and laughs at the world.
 This Demirchyan approach, of course, has been discussed and criticized many times, but we think that it was imperative at the time.
 Nazar, who immediately became king, believes that he will bring good luck again.
1 Demirchyan D., page 449.
2 Ibid., P. 225.
3 Ibid., P. 236.
Note that M. Before Sargsyan, they wanted to write a novel on this topic. Demirchyan և G. Mahari.
 Մ. In Sargsyan's novel, Nazar's character is revealed through idioms and dialogues.
  In the monologues, Nazar is with himself; he is not afraid to speak wrong, because "power" does not exist.
  The dialogues are different, which, so to speak, are the opposite of monologue-coins.
  In fact, Nazar is a coin that has two faces, but it shows only one side, keeping everyone in a trance.
  His monologues mainly refer to fear, luck and real "love".
 This is the only place where he is free and truthful.
 The fear is in his blood, the twin, it seems that it should have disturbed Nazar, but here and there he sees that due to this fear he makes the tree broom, rides a tiger, subdues giants, keeps a kingdom.
  In one of his speeches, however, he encourages himself, wondering how the people believe that one can fight against a thousand, even if one of them is the Archangel Gabriel.
  He realizes his uselessness, but in one of the dialogues (talking to Nazan) he expresses a completely opposite opinion. "If one day Nazar is not on the throne, the world will stop halfway, it will stay."
 It can be said that waking up after the heroic deeds and realizing the new achievement of fame, the mysterious smile hanging from the lips, are another manifestation of the monologue that is denied through dialogue. "Could I not kill the beast that you killed?"
  I could.
  But I did not.
Do you know why?
  I could hardly find a good horse… »2.
  Only Nazan understands the essence of Nazareth, he does not want such a fate for his child.
  The woman came to the conclusion that the Nazars wet their fear at night, were afraid of demons and devils, blew courage every day and, as soon as it got dark, entered the throne, refusing to take a bath out of laziness and snobbery.
 If at first Nazar is the savior of the people, then, realizing his "great" power, he gradually turns into a real dictator.
He is endowed with extreme poverty and hypocrisy.
 This weak-skinned vulgar, cowardly, but cautious selfish person becomes a cruel creature longing for a "bloodbath", but not a monster, otherwise the realism of the character would suffer.
Thus, Nazar is a unique manifestation of the human type in literature, which is eternal.
 On this occasion, N. Aghbalyan writes. "Not only people are brave Nazars, but also ideas, theories, institutions, which are hollow, nothing, worthless, but they have taken the world in their hands, they laugh at them.
  And as long as there is human vanity and majesty, the accursed tendency of self-inspiration and prejudice, humanity will still see many cowardly Nazars who have become Brave Nazars.
Nazarene is in every corner, in each of our veins, և one by one it accelerates with our heartbeats and makes itself felt.
  Clever and conscious people suffocate Nazar, who has raised his head, but they are happier when Nazar, who has raised his head, emerges victorious by his luck, grants Nazar luck and puts his "dwelling" (Isahakyan) in their lap.
1 Demirchyan D., page 242.
2 Ibid., P.
3 Aghbalyan N., Hovhannes Tumanyan's "Brave Nazar", "Reborn Armenia", Yerevan, 1.1989, p. 57.
This character will live as long as people believe in the fairy tale, as long as they are sure that they can make anyone a king, until the mystery of Nazar's eternity is revealed.
Nazar of the 21st century lives everywhere: in politics, in life, in the fields of culture and science.
  His presence in this last sphere is even more terrible.
  Using the sword and flag-turning bribe for himself now, he changes his color like a snake, crawls through impassable places, poisons common sense and thought whenever he wants, and becomes an enlightened and unsurpassed face among the intelligentsia.
  And if you try to raise your muffled voice called truth, you will become a "classic" (Sargsyan) և, which is more terrible, a traitor of the nation.
 Nazar is everywhere, he rules and laughs at us, our people, knowing full well that if he leaves all of us free for a moment, the same people who raised him will swallow him.
  That's why he has to live, to be an eternal king and a world of laughter.
Arpine Amiraghyan THE IMAGE OF KAZ NAZAR IN ARMENIAN LITERATURE Keywords: luck, Nazar's philosophy, imagery, modern essence.
