THE CASE OF COOPERATION ACCORDING TO THE DRAFT NEW CODE OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE OF RA The issue of differentiation of the judicial horse in the criminal trial has been և remains in the center of attention of the judicial experts.
 It has become more urgent at the current stage of criminal justice reform, which aims to have an effective, thrifty, internationally-sounding criminal trial.
In this paper, in the light of the draft of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code, we will discuss the essence and significance of the cooperation proceedings, the peculiarities, the order of application, as well as the positive and negative sides of this institution.
The procedure of cooperation with the accused is widely and quite effectively used today in the criminal proceedings of a number of foreign countries.
  This institute is aimed at solving such problems as revealing crimes, exposing criminals, receiving confessions about them, etc.
The legal institution called the "deal with justice" was known in medieval Britain as the "review of the sinner's case."
This procedure is currently envisaged by the legislation of a number of countries (for example, USA, France, Germany, Italy, Russia, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Georgia, Moldova, Bulgaria), and the study of their experience confirms the necessity of applying this institution.
It should be noted that the draft of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code envisages the institution under discussion for the first time, so it is an innovation in our reality.
  The introduction of this institution may raise fears that its use may be a way to avoid just punishment by slandering innocent people.
  At the same time, we must not forget that this institution allows us to detect more serious and difficult-to-detect or latent crimes.
Besides, by concluding an agreement, the accused is not released from criminal responsibility. he is serving a well-deserved but relatively mild punishment.
Part 2 of Article 461 of the new draft Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Armenia (hereinafter referred to as the Draft) stipulates that a motion for cooperation may be submitted from the moment of initiating criminal prosecution against the accused until the announcement of the end of the preliminary investigation.
 A. Smirnov notes that in order to cooperate, a person can mediate criminal prosecution. 1 See the draft of the new RA Criminal Procedure Code (as of November 5, 2013).
from the moment of talking to getting acquainted with the materials of the criminal case1.
  We consider the draft regulation more acceptable, as we should not forget that this institute is aimed at reducing the burden of pre-trial proceedings, saving resources and time at that stage.
  However, we think it would be more expedient if such motions are submitted after getting acquainted with the materials of the case, because from that very moment the accused can get a complete picture of the merits of the accusation.
 Only from that moment can he form an objective idea about the "chances" of his accusation. After all, at the moment of initiating the criminal prosecution, it is not yet clear whether the bodies conducting the proceedings can prove his guilt.
The draft states that the purpose of the cooperation proceedings is to reveal serious or particularly serious crimes, to ensure the inevitability of the responsibility of the persons who committed them.
 We think that it is quite justified in the draft to establish the possibility of cooperating only for the detection of these types of crimes, as these crimes are often more difficult to detect, are endangered by the public, so not detecting serious, especially serious crimes can have more dangerous consequences than not. non-disclosure of large-medium crimes.
 In addition, it would be unjust to improve the situation of the accused in order to reveal crimes that are not dangerous for the society or are easily detected.
D. Veliki mentions that the cooperation proceedings can be applied only in cases where several people participated in the crime2.
 However, we think that such a restriction is unacceptable, as there are possible cases when the accused helps to reveal crimes where there are no accomplices or accomplices.
According to Article 460, Part 3 of the new draft Criminal Procedure Code, "Cooperation mediation must relate to a crime related to a particular charge, which is being investigated in the same or another proceeding."
  Examining another part of the Draft, Article 468, it becomes clear that the court can not satisfy the motion to conduct the trial in a special way, if the cooperation of the accused led to the sole disclosure of information about his participation.
 We agree with this approach, because if the accused gives information about his participation, then in that case there is an active institution of remorse, which is an independent basis for acquittal, responsibility or mitigation of punishment.
 At the same time, this proceeding is, in fact, applicable in cases when the accused provides information with his participation 1 See Smirnov A., Special order of acceptance of a court decision at the conclusion of an arbitral agreement, according to St. Petersburg, 2009 agreesние о сотрудничестве (гл. 40.1 УПК РФ).
  new questions in the fatherly role-playing process, "ъристъ - правоведъ", 2010, № 5, pp. 46-49).
2 See Veliki D., Judicial Consent on Cooperation in the Russian Conversational Process, Journal of Russian Rights, 2010, № 2 (quoted by Bahnovski A., pp. 46-49).
about the crime committed, but not about the episodes of his participation, but about the participation of his accomplices.
 We believe that the mediation of cooperation can also refer to other crimes that are not related to the case of the accused, as the important thing is not the fact that the information is related to the accused, but the content of the information provided by the accused, which can help identify criminals. .
 Therefore, it should not be ruled out that there may be cases when the accused has information about a crime or the perpetrators, which is in no way related to the crime committed by him.
Cooperation proceedings can be initiated only by a person accused of supporting a minor or medium-gravity, as well as a serious or particularly serious crime, in case of submitting a motion for cooperation in concluding a pre-trial agreement (new draft of the RA Criminal Code, Article 460, part 2).
  We believe that a person accused of inciting serious, especially serious crimes can file a motion, as criminal law considers inciting serious or particularly serious crimes to be a correspondingly serious or particularly serious crime, but the public danger of these crimes is significantly lower than the perpetrator of the same type of crime or Compared to the actions of the organizer, at the same time their danger is almost close to the support of the same type of crimes.
  In our opinion, it is permissible to apply cooperation to persons who have committed serious or particularly serious crimes with certain reservations, when a member of an organized group who has committed a serious crime within the group expresses a desire to cooperate by providing information about all members of the organized group and all actions.
  In fact, the Draft prohibits co-operation in such cases, or it is obvious that this person can provide much more effective information than, for example, the same group supporter who has little information about the organization and course of the crime.
  Therefore, it would be more effective to give the perpetrators of especially serious crimes the opportunity to cooperate, of course, under stricter conditions, for example, if the legislature stipulates that in the case of serious crimes no more than two-thirds of the sanction may be imposed, and especially in the case of serious crimes more than three-quarters.
In the theoretical literature, the question is whether the admission of guilt by the accused is a necessary condition for the application of the disputed law.
Thus, A. Smirnov thinks that in order to cooperate, the accused is only required to cooperate1.
  Consciously agreeing, I. Zvecharovsky adds that the purpose of this institute is 1 See Smirnov A., (quoted by Bakhnovsky A., pp. 46-49).
What follows is not the admission of guilt of the offender, but his exhortation to exhibit positive post-criminal behavior1.
Contrary to this opinion, S. Pogodin և A. According to Bakhnovsky, the reduction of the punishment for a crime is possible only in the case of a person's confession or repentance2.
We share A. Smirnov և I. Zveicharovsky's opinion, because we are not interested in the fact whether the accused admits his guilt, but in the fact that he is willing to assist the law enforcement bodies.
 There are cases when the accused does not admit guilt, but understands that all the evidence in the case is against him, հնարավոր the possibility of objective justification is very small, so he expresses willingness to cooperate, expecting a milder punishment.
  Such legal regulations are also the criminal procedure laws of Spain, Italy, Portugal and other European countries, which consider the object of discussion not to admit the guilt of the accused, but to formally admit the accusation, that is, the accused may not consider himself guilty.
The petition for co-operation proceedings shall be signed by the accused and his defense counsel and, within three days of its receipt, addressed to the supervising prosecutor by the investigator, enclosing his / her written opinion on its satisfaction or rejection.
 Naturally, the investigator's opinion is not obligatory for the prosecutor.
  And, for example, the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation stipulates that the motion is submitted to the investigator, who makes a decision on accepting or rejecting it.
 After making a decision on the satisfaction, he sends the motion to the prosecutor, who also makes a decision to approve or reject the motion.
  We think that the drafting of the draft is more logical and acceptable.
The prosecutor, receiving the motion and the opinion of the investigator, makes a decision within three days whether to satisfy or reject the mediation.
It is clear from the analysis of the draft that the initiator of the mediation can be the accused or his defense counsel, and the cooperation can be terminated if the accused refuses to cooperate with a written application before the obligations under the cooperation agreement.
If the accused does not have a lawyer at the time of submitting the motion, the investigator shall take measures to ensure the participation of the lawyer in the proceedings; է shall give the accused the opportunity to discuss the motion with the lawyer.
 And according to Article 46, Part 2, Clause 9 of the draft, in case of mediation of cooperation proceedings, the participation of the Defender is obligatory.
The mediation of the co-operation states what the nature of the co-accused's co-operation is, և the actions that he's guilty pp. 46-49).
2 See Pogodin S., Some current problems in the application of a particular order of comprehension to the constituent role process, "Russian ostics", 2009, № 9 (quoted by Bahnovski A., pp. 46-49)
It is obligatory to commit the crime in order to assist in revealing the crime or ensuring the inevitability of the responsibility of the person who committed it.
  If there are several defendants in the case, they submit separate motions, which, if satisfied, the prosecutor concludes a separate agreement with each of them.
In case of satisfying the cooperation motion, the supervising prosecutor, with the participation of the investigator, the accused and his / her defense counsel, draws up a cooperation agreement, the content of which is defined in Article 463, Part 2 of the Draft.
It should be noted that with the agreed proceedings, the preliminary investigation is carried out in a general manner, but after drawing up an agreement, the proceedings against the accused are terminated.
During the cooperation proceedings, the supervising prosecutor has the right to make a decision on the suspension of the criminal prosecution through the mediation of the investigator, until the publication of the final judgment of the court of first instance, in connection with which the accused undertook the obligation of cooperation.
After confirming the indictment (within the timeframe in accordance with the general procedure), the supervising prosecutor submits a motion to the competent court to apply a special procedure to the accused, or by a decision refuses to transfer the criminal case to the court, if the defendant has not fulfilled his obligations.
The court satisfies the motion to hold the trial in a special order, decides on holding additional hearings, and in the absence of even one of the conditions listed in Part 2 of the Draft 467, the court decides to refuse to hold the trial in a special manner and to continue the preliminary hearings.
The evidence proving the guilt of the accused is not examined in the cooperation proceedings.
  During the additional hearings, only the evidence is examined, which confirms: 1. the nature and limits of the accused's cooperation, 2. the proper fulfillment of the obligations assumed by the accused under the agreement, 3. the role of the accused in revealing the crime, ensuring the inevitability of the perpetrator. the circumstances that characterize the person of the accused, as well as the mitigating and aggravating circumstances of his responsibility (punishment - L.E.), 5. the degree of threat to the security of the accused, another close relative of the accused as a result of cooperation (draft new criminal law, Article 468, point 6).
As a result of the co-operation proceedings, the court renders a guilty verdict, imposing a lesser sentence than provided by law, without applying the sentence conditionally.
  In Spain, the sentence imposed in this case can not exceed six years of imprisonment, and in Italy it is reduced to one third of the term of imprisonment.
In case of cooperation proceedings, there are certain peculiarities related to the issue of appealing the verdict.
  Thus, a judgment rendered in a co-operation proceeding may be appealed in general, but may not be appealed on the following grounds: 1. The facts of the court set forth in the Judicial Act of the Court of First Instance on the factual circumstances do not correspond to the evidence examined in the Court of First Instance or the Court of Appeal. 2. The legal assessment of the defendant's conviction is correct because there is no corpus delicti in his act. (instead of acquittal or termination of criminal prosecution, the accused has been convicted), 3. the legal assessment of the accused's act is incorrect due to its severity, 4. the legal assessment of the accused's act is incorrect due to its mildness.
However, if, after the relevant sentence has been applied to the accused, it is found that he / she intentionally provided false information to the pre-investigation body or concealed any essential information, the sentence shall be subject to review in the manner prescribed for exceptional review.
The theory also discusses the question of whether co-operation does not limit the independence of the judiciary.
 We think that in any case the independence of the court cannot be questioned, as the court is not constrained by the mediation of cooperation. he is obliged to reject the motion և to conduct the examination of the case in a general order, if he finds out that it is groundless.
  Even if the court upheld the motion, conducted an additional trial, it should not rule on the same grounds as before, it should decide to resume the preliminary hearings.
In theory, the issue of protection of the rights of the victim in case of application of cooperation proceedings is hotly debated.
 Thus, V. According to Bikov, the victim should have the right to express his position before the agreement is reached1.
  A. Smirnov points out that based on the right of the victim to a fair trial guaranteed by the Constitution, in order to conclude an agreement to apply for co-operation proceedings, the victim must have the consent2.
A. Alexandrov notes that the consent of the victim is not a necessary precondition, the legislator thus showed the right approach.
  As a substantiation of all this, he adds that the goal of this institute is the public interest - to reveal crimes, first of all new crimes.
  If we depend on the will of the victim to achieve that goal, this institution will lose its significance.
 In addition, there is a high probability that the victim is 1 See Bykov V., New law on the part of defendants with justice.
 criticisms, "Russian Court", 2009, № 11, pages 4-7.
2 See Smirnov A., Special order of fateful decisions in the conclusion of arbitrary coercion of coercion, "Angular process", 2009, № 11, pp. 5-14.
He who puts his personal interests above the public interest1.
 We think this position is more acceptable.
  It is true that on one side there is the issue of protection of the victim's rights, and on the other - the issue of revealing crimes, but we think that in this case the public interest is more paramount, դրան preference should be given to it.
  At the same time, the principles of the draft Criminal Procedure Code are aimed at balancing public-private interests, so we believe that by protecting the public interest, we also take care of the protection of private interests.
From the study of the draft, it becomes clear that the protection of the rights of the victim, however, is not neglected, as a special condition for the implementation of a special procedure of co-trial is that the accused must compensate the victim for the damage caused by the crime.
In order for the criminal case to be conducted fairly through co-operation proceedings, the Draft sets out a number of guarantees, such as the defendant's willingness to file a motion, the mandatory participation of counsel, the supervising prosecutor's co-operation motion and its approval or rejection (which is unconstitutional). ), the approval or rejection of the motion to appoint a special hearing by the court (which, in fact, is a unique manifestation of judicial control).
  It should be noted that, as a guarantee of the independence of the court, Part 2 of Article 467 of the Draft stipulates: "The court shall satisfy the motion to conduct the trial in a special manner, if it is satisfied that: 1. the pre-trial cooperation agreement was concluded voluntarily by the accused, with the participation of the defense counsel, in compliance with the other requirements provided for in this chapter, 2. the defendant was duly satisfied. Evidence, 3. The defendant's cooperation did not lead to the mere disclosure of information about his involvement in the commission of the crime; 4. There is no obvious evidence that he did not commit the charge against the accused. "
The same article stipulates that even in the absence of one of the above conditions, the court makes a separate decision to refuse to hold the trial in a special order and to continue the preliminary hearings in a general manner.
Thus, the new institute of criminal procedure can be viewed in different aspects, in particular, as an effective means of combating crime or a new incentive for the accused to change his post-criminal behavior.
 At the same time, it is an effective way to save court costs and time, to be overburdened with the bodies conducting the proceedings 1 See Александров А., ФЗ-141 принят, что дальше? (legal and criminal problems), "Materials of scientific-practical conferences (Voronezh, December 21-22, 2009)", vol. 6, Voronezh, 2010, pp. 7-15.
to keep it free.
  At the same time, the applicability of this institution cannot be spatial.
Liana Edigaryan CASE OF COOPERATION ACCORDING TO THE DRAFT NEW CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
